<h2>PART ONE</h2>

<h3>Chapter 1</h3>


<h4>I</h4>

<p>SHE was scrubbing furiously at a line of grease
spots which led from the stove towards the
door to the dining-room. That was where Henry
had held the platter tilted as he carried the steak in
yesterday. And yet if she had warned him once
about that, she had a thousand times! Warned
him, and begged of him, and implored him to be
careful. The children simply paid no attention to
what she said. None. She might as well talk to
the wind. <i>Hot</i> grease too! That soaked into the
wood so. She would never get it clean.</p>

<p>She shook the surplus of water from her scrubbing-brush,
sat back on her heels, sprinkled cleaning-powder
on the bristles—the second can of cleaning-powder
this month, and the price gone up so!—and
setting her strong teeth hard, flew at the
spots again, her whole body tense with determination.</p>

<p>A sober-faced little boy in clean gingham rompers,
with a dingy Teddy-bear in his arms, appeared at
the door of the dining-room behind her, looked in
cautiously, surveyed his mother’s quivering, energetic
back for an instant, and retreated silently without
being seen.</p>

<p>She stopped, breathless, dipped her hand into the
pail of hot soapy water, and brought out a hemmed,
substantial floor-cloth, clean and whole. When,
with a quick twist, she had wrung this out, she
wiped the suds from the floor and looked sharply at
the place she had been scrubbing.</p>

<p>The grease spots still showed, implacably dark
against the white wood about them.</p>

<p>Her face clouded, she gave a smothered exclamation
and seized the scrubbing-brush again.</p>

<p>In the next room a bell tinkled. The telephone!
It always rang when it would bother her most.</p>

<p>She dropped her brush, stood up with one powerful
thrust of her body, and went to wipe her hands
on the roller-towel which hung, smooth and well-ironed,
by the sink.</p>

<p>The bell rang again. Exasperated by its unreasonableness,
she darted across the dining-room
and snatched the receiver from the hook.</p>

<p>“Yes, this is Mrs. Knapp.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s you, Mattie.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Oh, all about as usual here, thank you. Helen
has one of her awful colds, but not so I have to keep
her at home. And Henry’s upset again, that chronic
trouble with his digestion. The doctor doesn’t seem
to do him any good.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“No, my eczema is no worse. On my arm now.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“How could I keep it perfectly quiet? I <i>have</i> to
use it! You know I have everything to do. And
anyhow I don’t know that’s it’s any worse to use it.
I keep it bandaged of course.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Oh, Stephen’s well enough. He’s never <i>sick</i>, you
know. But into <i>every</i>thing! He drives me frantic
when I’m flying around and trying to get the work
done up; and I don’t know what to do with him
when he gets into those tantrums. It’ll be an awful
relief to me when he starts to school with the
others. Perhaps the <i>teachers</i> can do something
with him. I don’t envy them.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Mercy, <i>no</i>, Mattie! How can you think of such
a thing? I never can take the time for outings! I
was right in the midst of scrubbing the kitchen floor
when you rang up. I’m way behind in everything.
I always am. There’s not a room in the house that’s
fit to look at. And I’ve got to make some of those
special health-flour biscuits for supper. The doctor
said to keep trying them for Henry.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“How can I go out more and rest more? You
know what there is to do. <i>Somebody’s</i> got to do it.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Yes, I know that’s what the doctor keeps telling
me. I’d just like to have him spend a day in my
place and see how he thinks I could manage. Nobody
understands! People talk as though I worked
the way I do just to amuse myself. What <i>else</i> can
I do? It’s all got to be done, hasn’t it?”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“No, it’s nice of you to suggest it, but I couldn’t
manage it. It would just waste your time to come
round this way and stop. It’s simply out of the
question for me to think of going.”</p>

<p>.......</p>

<p>“Well, thank you just the same. I appreciate
your thinking of me. I’m sure I hope you have a
lovely time.”</p>



<p>An ominous silence in the house greeted her as
she hung up the receiver and turned away. What
could Stephen be up to, <i>now</i>? She had not heard a
sound from him for some time. That was always
alarming from Stephen.</p>

<p>“Stephen!” She called quickly and stood listening
for an answer, her fine dark brows drawn together
tensely.</p>

<p>The house waited emptily with her for the answer
which did not come.</p>

<p>“Stephen!” she shouted, turning so that her voice
would carry up the stairs.</p>

<p>“<i>Tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick</i>—” whispered the
little mantelpiece clock hurriedly in the silence.</p>

<p>She was rarely quiet enough to hear that sound,
but when it did come to her ears, it always said
pressingly, “So much to do! So much to do! So
much to do!”</p>

<p>She looked at it and frowned. Half-past two
already! And that floor only half scrubbed. What
possessed people to call you up on the telephone at
all hours? Didn’t anybody realize what she had
to do!</p>

<p>“Stephen!” she called irritably, running upstairs.
Was there anything more exasperating than to have
a child not answer when you called? Helen and
Henry had never <i>dreamed</i> of that when they had
been his age. It was another one of his naughty
tricks, a new one! He had a new one every day.
And he always knew just when was the worst possible
time to try one on. The water in her scrubbing
pail was cooling off all the time and she had just
filled up the reservoir of the kitchen stove with cold,
so that she couldn’t have another pailful of hot for
an hour.</p>

<p>“Stephen!” The thought of the cooling water
raised the heat of her resentment against the child.</p>

<p>She looked hastily into the spotless bathroom, the
bedroom where Stephen’s smooth white cot stood
by his parents’ bed, into Henry’s little dormer-windowed
cubby-hole—there! Henry had left his shoes
in the middle of the floor again!—into Helen’s room
where a great bias fold in the badly made bed deepened
the line between her eyes.</p>

<p>Still no Stephen. It was too much. With all she
had to do, slaving day and night to keep the house
nice for them all who never thought of appreciating
it, never any rest or change, her hair getting thinner
all the time, simply coming out by handfuls, and
she had had such beautiful hair, so many things to
do this afternoon while Mattie was out, enjoying
herself, riding in a new car, and now everything
stopped because of this naughty trick of Stephen’s
of not answering.</p>

<p>“Stephen!” she screamed, her face darkly flushed.
“Tell me where you are this minute!”</p>

<p>In that tiny house he must be quite within earshot.</p>

<p>But the tiny house sent back not the faintest
murmur of response. The echo of her screaming
voice died away to a dead silence that closed in on
her menacingly and laid on her feverish, angry heart
the cold touch of terror.</p>

<p>Suppose that Stephen were not hiding from her!
Suppose he had stepped out into the yard a moment
and had been carried away. There had been those
rough-looking men loitering in the streets yesterday—tramps
from the railroad yards.... Oh, and the
railroad yards so close! Mrs. Elmore’s little Harry
killed there by a freight-train. Or the river! Standing
there in the dark upper hall, she saw Stephen’s
little hands clutching wildly at nothing and going
down under that dreadful, cold, brown water.
Stephen, her baby, her darling, the strongest and
brightest of them all, her favorite....</p>

<p>She flew down the stairs and out the front door
into the icy February air, calling wildly: “Stephen!
Stevie! Stevie, darling!”</p>

<p>But the dingy street was quite empty save for a
grocer’s wagon standing in front of one of the little
clapboarded houses. She ran down to this and
asked the boy driving it: “Have you seen Stephen
since you turned into the street? You know, little
Stephen Knapp?”</p>

<p>“No, I ain’t seen him,” said the boy, looking up
and down the street with her.</p>

<p>A thin old woman came out on the front porch
of the house next to the Knapp’s.</p>

<p>“You haven’t seen Stephen, have you, Mrs. Anderson?”
called Stephen’s mother.</p>

<p>“No, I haven’t see him, Mrs. Knapp. I don’t believe
he’d go out this cold day. He’s just hiding on
you somewhere. Children will do that, if you let
them. If he were <i>my</i> child, Mrs. Knapp, I’d cure
him of that trick before he so much as started it—by
the shingle method too! I never used to let <i>my</i>
children get ahead of me. Once you let them get
the start on you with some....”</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp’s anxious face reddened with resentment.
She went back to her own house and shut the
door behind her hard.</p>

<p>Inside she began a systematic search of every
possible hiding place, racing from one to another,
now hot with anger, now cold with fear, sick, sick
with uncertainty. She did not call the child now.
She hunted him out silently and swiftly.</p>

<p>But there was no Stephen in the house. He <i>must</i>
have gone out! Even if he were safe, he would
be chilled to the bone by this time! And suppose
he were not safe! If only they didn’t live in such
an abominable part of the town, so near the railroad
yards and the slums! Her anger dropped
away. She forgot the barb planted in her vanity by
old Mrs. Anderson. As she flung on her wraps, she
was shivering from head to foot; she was nothing but
loving, suffering, fearing motherhood. If she had
seen her Stephen struggling in the arms of a dozen
big hoodlums, she would have flown at them like
a tigress, armed only with teeth and claws and her
passionate heart.</p>

<p>Her hand on the doorknob, she thought of one last
place she had not searched. The dark hole under
the stairs. She turned to that and flung back the
curtain.</p>



<p>Stephen was there, his Teddy-bear clutched in
his arms, silent, his round face grim and hard, scowling
defiantly at her.</p>

<h4>II</h4>

<p>When Mother was scrubbing a floor was always
a good time for Stephen. She forgot all about you
for a while. Oh, what a weight fell off from your
shoulders when Mother forgot about you for a
while! How perfectly lovely it was just to walk
around in the bedroom and know she wouldn’t come
to the door any minute and look at you hard and
say, “What are you doing, Stephen?” and add, “How
<i>did</i> you get your rompers so dirty?”</p>

<p>Stephen stepped about and about in the room,
silently, drawing long breaths. The bed, the floor,
the bureau, everything looked different to you in
the times when Mother forgot about you for a
minute. It occurred to Stephen that maybe it was
a rest to them, too, to have Mother forget about
them and stop dusting and polishing and pushing
them around. They <i>looked</i> sort of peaceful, the
way he felt. He nodded his head to the bed and
looked with sympathy at the bureau.</p>

<p>The lower drawer was a little open. There was
something white showing.... Mother didn’t allow
you to open her bureau drawers, but that looked
like ... it <i>was</i>! He pulled the drawer open and
snatched out his Teddy-bear ... his dear, dear
Teddy-bear. So <i>that</i> was where she had hidden it!</p>

<p>He sat down on the floor, holding the bear tightly
in his arms, wave after wave of relief washing over
him in a warm relaxing flood. All his life long,
ever since he could remember, more than three years
now, he had gone to sleep with his big Teddy in
his arms. The sight of the faithful pointed face,
like no other face, the friendly staring black eyes,
the familiar feel of the dear, woolly body close to
him—they were saturated with a thousand memories
of peace, with a thousand associations of drowsy
comfort and escape from trouble. Days when he
had been punished and then shut, screaming furiously,
into the bedroom to “cry it out,” he had
gone about blindly, feeling for Teddy through his
tears, and, exhausted by his shrieking and kicking
and anger, had often fallen asleep on the floor,
Teddy in his arms, exercising that mystic power of
consolation. The groove in Stephen’s brain was
worn deep and true; Teddy meant quiet and rest
and safety ... and Stephen needed all he could
get of those elements in his stormy little life, made
up, so much of it, of fierce struggles against forces
stronger than he.</p>

<p>The little boy sat on the floor of the quiet room,
surrounded by the quiet furniture, resting itself
visibly, and hugged his recovered treasure tightly to
him, his round cheek pressed hard against the dingy
white wool of the stuffed muzzle. He <i>loved</i> Teddy!
He loved his Teddy! He was lost in unfathomable
peace to have found him again. All the associations
of tranquillity, the only tranquillity in Stephen’s life,
which had accumulated about Teddy, rose in impalpable
clouds about the child. What the smell
of incense and the murmur of prayers are to the
believer, what the first whiffs of his pipe to the dog-tired
woodsman, what a green-shaded lamp over a
quiet study table to the scholar, all that and more
was Teddy to Stephen. His energetic, pugnacious
little face grew dreamy, his eyes wide and gentle.
For a moment not only had Mother forgotten about
him, but he had forgotten about Mother.</p>

<p>Was it only four days ago that this new bitter
phase of Stephen’s struggle for existence had come
up? Mother had taken him to call on a lady. They
had walked and walked and walked, Stephen’s short
legs twinkling fast beside Mother’s long, strong
stride, his arm almost pulled out of the socket by
the firm grasp on his mittened hand by which she
drew him along at her pace. He had been breathless
when they arrived, and filled with that ruffled,
irritable, nervous fatigue which walking with Mother
always gave him. Then, after long and intolerably
dull conversation, during which Stephen had been
obliged to “sit still and don’t touch things,” the
lady had showed them that hideous, pitiable, tragic
wreck, which she had said was a washed Teddy-bear.
“It suddenly occurred to me, Mrs. Knapp,
that the amount of dirt and microbes that creature
had been accumulating for two years must be beyond
words. Molly drags it around on the floor,
as like as not....”</p>

<p>“Yes, just like Stephen with his Teddy,” Stephen’s
mother said.</p>

<p>“And once I thought of it, it made me shudder.
So I just put it in the tub and washed it. You see
it came out all right.”</p>

<p>She held up the dreadful remains, by one limp,
lumpy arm, and both the mothers looked at it with
interest and approval. Stephen’s horror had been
unspeakable. If Mother did that to <i>his</i> Teddy ...
his Teddy who was like a part of himself.... The
fierce fighting look had come into Stephen’s eyes
and under the soft curves of rounded baby flesh he
set his jaw.</p>

<p>But he had said nothing to Mother as they tore
back across town, Mother in a hurry about getting
her supper on time. Mother prided herself on never
yet having set a meal on the table a single minute
late. He said nothing, partly because he had no
breath left over from his wild leaps from curb to
paving and from paving to curb; and partly because
he had not the slightest idea how to express the
alarm, the bleeding grief, within him. Stephen’s
life so far had developed in him more capacity for
screaming and kicking and biting than for analyzing
and expressing his feelings in words.</p>

<p>That night Mother had taken Teddy away—treacherously,
while Stephen was asleep. The next
morning she announced that now she thought of
the dirt and microbes on Teddy it made her shudder
and as soon as she found time she would wash him
and give him back to Stephen. Stephen had been
filled with a silent frenzy every time he thought
of it.</p>

<p>But now he had found Teddy, held him again in
his arms that had ached for emptiness these three
nights past. Stephen’s hot little warrior’s heart softened
to love and quiet as he sat there; and presently
there came to his calmer mind the plan to go
to tell Mother about it. If he <i>told</i> her about it,
maybe she wouldn’t take Teddy away and spoil him.</p>

<p>He went downstairs to find Mother, his lower lip
trembling a little with his hope and fear, as Mother
had not seen it since Stephen was a little tiny baby.
Nor did she see it this time.</p>

<p>He went to the kitchen door and looked in, and
instantly knew through a thousand familiar channels
that it would do no good to tell Mother, then—or
ever. The kitchen was full, full to suffocation with
waves of revolt, and exasperation, and haste, and
furious determination, which clashed together in the
air above that quivering, energetic figure kneeling
on the floor. They beat savagely on the anxious
face of the little boy. He recognized them from
the many times he had felt them and drew back
from them, an instant reflection of revolt and determination
lurid on his own face. How could he have
thought, even for a moment, of telling Mother!</p>

<p>He turned away clutching Teddy and looked
about him wildly. All around him was the inexorable
prison of his warm, clean, well-ordered home.
No escape. No appeal. No way to protect what
was dear to him! There fell upon him that most
sickening and poisonous of human emotions, the
sensation of utter helplessness before physical violence.
Mother would take Teddy away and do
whatever she pleased with him because she was
stronger than Stephen. The brute forces of jungle
life yelled loud in Stephen’s ears and mocked at his
helplessness.</p>

<p>But Stephen was no Henry or Helen to droop,
to shrink and quail. He fled to his own refuge,
the only one which left him a shred of human dignity:
fierce, hopeless, endless resistance: the determination
of every brave despairing heart confronted
with hopeless odds, at least to sell his safety dear;
to fight as long as his strength held out: never, never
to surrender of his own accord. Over something
priceless, over what made him Stephen, the little
boy stood guard savagely with the only weapons he
had.</p>

<p>First of all he would hide. He would hold
Teddy in his arms as long as he could, and hide,
and let Mother call to him all she wanted to, while
he braced himself to endure with courage the tortures
which would inevitably follow ... the scolding
which Mother called “talking to him,” the beating
invisible waves of fury flaming at him from all
over Mother, which made Stephen suffer more than
the physical blows which always ended things, for
by the time they arrived he was usually so rigid
with hysteria himself that he did not feel them
much.</p>

<p>Under the stairs ... she would not think of
that for a long time. He crept in over the immaculately
clean floor, drew the curtains back of him,
and sat upright, cross-legged, holding Teddy to his
breast with all his might, dry-eyed, scowling, a
magnificent sulphurous conflagration of Promethean
flames blazing in his little heart.</p>





<h3>Chapter 2</h3>


<p>WHEN Lester Knapp stepped dispiritedly out
from Willing’s Emporium, he felt, as he
usually did, a thin little mittened hand slip into
each of his.</p>

<p>“Hello, Father,” said Helen.</p>

<p>“Hello, Father,” said Henry.</p>

<p>“Hello, children,” said Father, squeezing their
hands up tightly and looking down into their upturned
faces.</p>

<p>“How’s tricks?” he asked, as they stepped off, his
lagging step suddenly brisk. “What did the teacher
say to that composition, Helen?”</p>

<p>“She said it was <i>fine</i>!” said the little girl eagerly.
“She read it out to the class. She said maybe they’d
get me to write the play for the entertainment our
class is going to give, a history play, you know,
something that would bring in Indians and the early
settlers and the hiding regicides and what we’ve been
studying. I wanted to ask you if you thought I
could start it inside one of the houses, the night of
an Indian attack, everybody loading muskets and
barring the shutters and things, and the old hidden
regicide looking out through a crack to see where
the Indians were.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that would be <i>great</i>!” cried Henry admiringly,
craning his neck around his father to listen.
“What’s a regicide?” Henry was three grades behind
Helen in school and hadn’t begun on history.
His father and sister explained to him, both talking
at once. And then they laughed to hear their words
clashing together. They swung along rapidly, talking,
laughing, interrupting each other, Henry constantly
asking questions, the other two developing
the imaginary scene, thrilling at the imaginary danger,
loading imaginary muskets, their voices chiming
out like bells in the cold evening air. Once in a
while, Henry, who was small for his age, gave a
little animated hop and skip to keep up with the
others.</p>

<p>In front of the delicatessen-grocery store at the
corner of their street, the father suddenly drew them
to a halt. “What was it Mother asked me to bring
home with me?” He spoke anxiously, and anxiously
the children looked up at him. Suppose he should
not be able to remember it!</p>

<p>But he did. It was a package of oatmeal and a
yeast-cake. He dragged them triumphantly up from
his memory.</p>

<p>They entered the shop and found Aunt Mattie
Farnham there, buying ginger cookies and potato
salad and boiled ham. “My! I’m ashamed to have
you Knapps catch me at this!” she protested with
that Aunt Mattieish laugh of hers that meant that
she wasn’t really ashamed, or anything but cheerfully
ready to make fun of herself. “It’s not Evangeline
Knapp who’d be buying delicatessen stuff for
her family’s supper at six o’clock at night! We
went out in the new Buick this afternoon.... Oh,
Lester, she’s a dream, simply a <i>dream</i>! And we
went further than we meant. You always do, you
know. And of course, being me, there’s not a thing
in the house to eat. I put Frank and the children
to setting the table while I tore over here. Don’t
you tell Evangeline on me, Lester. I tried to get
her to go and take Stephen, but she wouldn’t—had
biscuits to make for supper and a floor to scrub or
something. She <i>never</i> lets things go, as I do. She’s
a perfect wonder, Evangeline is, anyhow. An example
to us all, I always tell ’em. After I’ve been in
your house, I declare, I’m ashamed to set foot in
my own!”</p>

<p>While the grocer wrapped up her purchases she
stooped her fair smiling face towards Helen to say,
“My gracious, honey, how swell we do look in
our new coat! Where did Momma buy that for
you?”</p>

<p>Helen looked down at it as if to see what coat
it was, as if she had forgotten that she wore a
coat. Then she said, “She made it, Mother made
it, out of an old coat Gramma Houghton sent us.
The collar and cuffs are off Cousin Celia’s last-winter
one.”</p>

<p>Aunt Mattie was lost in admiration. She turned
Helen around to get the effect of the back. “Well,
your mother is the <i>wonder</i>!” she cried heartily,
again. “I never saw anybody to beat her for style!
Give Evangeline Knapp a gunny sack and a horse-blanket
and she’ll turn you out a fifty-dollar coat,
I always tell ’em. Would anybody but her have
dreamed of using that blue and light green together?
It makes it look positively as if it came right from
Fifth Avenue. I don’t dare buy me a new hat or
a suit unless Evangeline says it’s all right. You
can’t fool her on style! What did <i>you</i> ever do,
Lester Knapp, to deserve such a wife, I’d like to
know.”</p>

<p>She laughed again, as Aunt Mattie always did,
just for the sake of laughing, gave Henry and Helen
each a cookie out of her paper bag, and took up her
boughten salad and boughten boiled ham and went
off, repeating, “Now, folks, don’t you go and give
me away!”</p>

<p>The grocery store seemed very silent after she
left. Mr. Knapp bought his yeast-cake and package
of oatmeal and they went out without a word. They
didn’t feel like talking any more. The children were
eating fast on their cookies to finish them before
they reached home.</p>

<p>They turned up the walk to the house in silence,
stood for some time scraping the snow and mud off
their shoes on the wire mat at the foot of the steps
and went on their toes up to the cocoa-fiber mat in
front of the door.</p>

<p>When they finally opened the door and stepped
in, an appetizing odor of hot chocolate and something
fresh out of the oven met them. Also the
sound of the clock striking half-past six. Good,
they were on time. It was very important to be
on time. Little Stephen sat on the bottom step of
the stairs, waiting for them, his face swollen and
mottled, his eyes very red, his mouth clamped shut
in a hard line.</p>

<p>“Oh, gee! I bet Stevie’s been bad again!” murmured
Henry pityingly. He went quickly to his
little brother and tried to toss him up. But the
heavy child was too much of a weight for his thin
arms. He only succeeded in giving him a great
hug. Helen did this too, and laid the fresh, outdoor
coolness of her cheek against the little boy’s
hot face, glazed by tears. They none of them made
a sound.</p>

<p>Lester Knapp stood silently looking at them.</p>

<p>Their mother came to the door, fresh in a well-ironed,
clean, gingham house-dress.</p>

<p>“Well, Evie dear, what’s the news from home?”
asked Lester, as the children separated and began
quickly hanging up their wraps. Stephen slipped
off back towards the kitchen.</p>

<p>“Oh, all right,” she said in her dear, well-modulated
voice, her eyes on Helen, to whom she now
said quietly, with a crescendo effect of patient self-restraint,
“Don’t wriggle around on one foot that
way to take off your rubbers. Sit down on a chair.
No, not that one, it’s too high. This one. Lay
down your schoolbooks. You can’t do anything with
them under your arm. There are your mittens on
the floor. Put them in your pocket and you’ll know
where to find them. Unless they’re damp. Are
they damp? If they are, take them into the kitchen
and put them on the rack to dry.” As the child
turned away, she called after her, making her give
a nervous jump, “Not too close to the stove, or
they’ll burn.”</p>

<p>She turned to Henry now (Stephen had disappeared).
He froze to immobility, looking at her out
of timid shadowed eyes, as if like a squirrel, he
hoped by standing very still to make himself
small....</p>

<p>Apparently Henry had taken off his coat and hat
satisfactorily and had suitably disposed of his
mittens, for, after passing her eyes over his small
person in one sweep, she turned away, saying over
her shoulder, “I’m just going to put supper on the
table. You’ll have time to wash your hands while
I dish up the things.”</p>

<p>Henry drew a long breath and started upstairs.
His father stood looking after him till with a little
start he came to himself and followed.</p>

<p>The supper bell rang by the time their hands and
faces were washed. Helen and Henry washed
Stephen’s. They did not talk. They kept their attention
on what they were doing, rinsing out the
wash-basin after they had finished, hanging the
towels up smoothly and looking responsibly around
them at the immaculate little room before they went
downstairs.</p>

<p>The supper was exquisitely cooked, nourishing,
light, daintily served. Scalloped potatoes, done to
a turn; a broiled beefsteak with butter melting oozily
on it; frothing, well-whipped chocolate; small
golden biscuits made out of a health-flour.</p>

<p>The children tucked their clean napkins under
their chins, spread them out carefully over their
clean clothes and, all but Stephen, ate circumspectly.</p>

<p>“Nothing special happened to-day, then?” asked
Mr. Knapp in a cheerful voice, looking over at the
erect, well-coifed house-mother.</p>

<p>“Just the usual things,” answered Mrs. Knapp,
reaching out to push Henry’s plate a little nearer to
him. “I haven’t been out anywhere, and nobody
has been in. Stephen, don’t eat so fast. Mattie
telephoned. Their new car has come. Henry, do
sit up straighter. You’ll be positively hunchbacked
if you keep stooping over so.”</p>

<p>At the mention of Aunt Mattie and the new car,
a self-conscious silence dropped over the older children
and their father. They looked down at their
plates.</p>

<p>“Helen, did you put salt on your potatoes?” asked
her mother. “I don’t put in as much as we like,
because the doctor says Henry shouldn’t eat things
very salt.”</p>

<p>“I put some on,” said Helen.</p>

<p>“Enough?” asked her mother doubtfully. “You
know it takes a lot for potatoes.”</p>

<p>Helen tasted her potatoes, as though she had not
till then thought about them. “Yes, there’s
enough,” she said.</p>

<p>“Let me taste them,” said her mother, holding out
her hand for the plate. After she had tasted them
she said, “Why, there’s not nearly enough, they’re
perfectly flat. Here, give me that salt-cellar.” She
added the salt, tasted the potatoes again and pushed
the plate back to Helen, who went on eating with
small mouthfuls, chewing conscientiously.</p>

<p>There was another silence.</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp helped himself to another biscuit, and
said as he spread it with butter, “Aren’t these biscuits
simply great! You’d never know, by the taste,
they were good for you, would you?”</p>

<p>Helen looked up quickly with a silent, amused
smile. Her eyes met her father’s with understanding
mirth.</p>

<p>“Take smaller mouthfuls, Stephen,” said Mrs.
Knapp.</p>

<p>Nobody said a word, made a comment, least of
all her husband, but she went on with some heat
as if in answer to an unspoken criticism. “I know
I keep at the children all the time! But how can
I help it? They’ve got to learn, haven’t they? It
certainly is no <i>pleasure</i> to me to do it! <i>Some</i>body’s
got to bring them up.”</p>

<p>The others quailed in silent remorse before this
arraignment. Not so Stephen. He paid no attention
whatever to it. His mother often said bitterly that
he paid no attention to anything a grown-up said
unless you screamed at him and stamped your foot.</p>

<p>“Gimme some more meat,” he said heartily,
pushing his plate towards his father.</p>

<p>“Say, ‘Please, Father,’” commanded his mother.</p>

<p>He looked blackly at her, longingly at the steak,
decided that the occasion was not worth a battle and
said, “Please, father,” in a tone which he contrived,
with no difficulty whatever, to make insulting.</p>

<p>His mother’s worn, restrained face took on a
deeper shade of disheartenment, but she did not lift
the cast-down glove, and the provocative accent of
rebellion continued to echo in the room triumphant
and unchecked. It did not seem to increase the
appetite of the other children. They kept their
eyes cast down and made themselves small in their
chairs.</p>

<p>It had no effect on Stephen’s enjoyment of his
meal. He ate heartily, like a robust lumberman
who has been battling with the elements all day
and knows he must fortify himself for a continuation
of the same struggle to-morrow. The mottled spots
on his cheeks blended into his usual healthy red.
He stopped eating for a moment to take a long and
audible draught out of his mug.</p>

<p>“Don’t make a noise when you drink your milk,”
said his mother.</p>

<p>The others ate lightly, sipping at their chocolate,
taking tiny mouthfuls of the steak and potatoes.</p>

<p>“Helen’s school composition had quite a success,”
said Helen’s father. “They are going to have some
dramatics at the school and....”</p>

<p>“What are dramatics?” asked Henry.</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s the general name for plays, comedies,
you know, and tragedies and....”</p>

<p>“What is a comedy?” asked Henry. “What is a
tragedy?”</p>

<p>“Good Heavens, Henry,” said his father, laughingly,
“I never saw anybody in my life who could
ask as many questions as you. You wear the life
out of me!”</p>

<p>“He doesn’t bother <i>me</i> with them,” said his
mother, her inflection presenting the statement as a
proof of her superior merit.</p>

<p>Henry shrank a little smaller. His father
hastened to explain what a tragedy was and what
a comedy was. Another silence fell. Then, “Quite
cold to-day,” said Mr. Knapp. “The boys at the office
said that the thermometer....” He had tried
to stop himself the moment the word “office” was
out of his mouth. But it was too late. He stuck
fast at “thermometer,” for an instant and then, hurriedly
as if quite aware that no one cared how he
finished the sentence, he added, “stood at only ten
above this morning.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp had glanced up sharply at the word
“office” and her eyes had darkened at the pause
afterwards. She was looking hard at her husband
now, as if his hesitation, as if his accent had told
her something. “Young Mr. Willing didn’t get back
to-day, did he?” she asked gravely.</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp took a long drink of his hot chocolate.
“Yes, he did,” he said at last, setting down his cup
and looking humbly at his wife.</p>

<p>“Did they announce the reorganization ... the
way he’s going to....” asked Mrs. Knapp. As if
she did not know the answer already!</p>

<p>They both already knew everything that was to
be asked and answered, but there seemed no escape
from going on.</p>

<p>“Yes, they did,” said Mr. Knapp, trying to chew
on a mouthful of steak.</p>

<p>“Who did they put in charge of your office?”
asked Mrs. Knapp, adding in an aside, “Helen, don’t
hold your fork like that.”</p>

<p>“Harvey Bronson,” said Mr. Knapp, trying to
make it sound like any other name.</p>

<p>“Oh,” said Mrs. Knapp.</p>

<p>She made no comment on the news. She made it
a point never to criticize their father before the
children.</p>

<p>Helen’s eyes went over timidly towards her
father, sideways under lowered lids. She wished
she dared give him a loving look of reassurance to
show him how dearly she loved him and sympathized
with him because he had not had the advancement
they had all hoped for so long, because a
younger man and one who was especially mean to
Father had been put over his head. Her heart
swelled and ached. She would get Father off in a
corner after dinner and give him a big silent hug.
He would understand.</p>

<p>But as it happened, she did not. Other things
happened.</p>



<p>There was almost total silence during the rest of
the meal. Mrs. Knapp did not eat another mouthful
of food after her husband’s news. The others
made a pretense of cutting up food and swallowing
it. Helen and Henry cleared off the table and
brought in the dessert.</p>

<p>“Be careful about holding the meat-platter
straight, Henry,” cautioned his mother. “I
scrubbed on those last grease spots till nearly five
o’clock this afternoon. It makes it very hard for
Mother when you and Helen are careless.” Her
voice was carefully restrained.</p>

<p>“How is your eczema, to-night, Eva?” asked her
husband.</p>

<p>“Oh, about the same,” she said. She served out
the golden preserved peaches, passed the home-made
cake, but took none herself. After sitting for a
few moments, she pushed back her chair and said:
“I don’t care for any dessert to-night. I’ll just
go and start on the dishes. You can come out to
help when you finish eating.”</p>

<p>Her husband looked up at her, his face pale and
shadowed. He tried to catch her eyes. But she
averted them, and without a glance at him walked
steadily out into the kitchen.</p>

<p>Her presence was still as heavy in the room as
though she sat there, brooding over them. They
conscientiously tried to eat. They did not look at
each other.</p>

<p>They heard her begin to pile up the dishes at the
sink, working rapidly as she always did. They
heard her step swiftly back towards the kitchen
table as though to pick up a dish there. They
heard her stop short with appalling abruptness; and
for a long moment a silence filled the little house,
roaring loudly in their ears as they gazed at
each other, across the table. What could have happened?</p>

<p>And then, with the effect of a clap of thunder
shaking them to the bone, came a sudden rending
outburst of sobs, strangled weeping, the terrifying
sounds of an hysteric breakdown.</p>

<p>They rushed out into the kitchen. Mrs. Knapp
stood in the middle of the kitchen floor, both hands
pressed over her face, trying in vain to restrain the
tears which rained down through her fingers, the
sobs which convulsed her tall, strong body. From
her feet to the dining-room door stretched a fresh
line of grease spots. Henry had once more tilted
the meat-platter as he carried it.</p>



<p>She heard them come in; she gave a muffled inarticulate
cry, half pronounced words they could
not understand, and, rushing past them, still shaking
with sobs, she ran upstairs to her room. They heard
the door shut, the click of the latch loud and distinct
in the silent house.</p>

<p>“I want another help of peaches,” said Stephen
greedily, taking instant advantage of his mother’s
absence. “I <i>like</i> peaches.”</p>

<p>His father thought sometimes that Stephen was
like the traditional changeling, hard, heartless, inhuman.</p>

<p>Henry’s face had turned very white. He stood
looking dully at his father and sister, his lips hanging
half-open. He turned from white to a yellow-green,
and a shudder shook him. He whispered
hastily, thickly, unintelligibly (but they understood
because they had seen those signs many times before),
he murmured, his hand clapped over his
mouth, his shoulders bowed, “... ’mfraid goin’ be
sick,” and ran upstairs to the bathroom.</p>

<p>They followed and found him vomiting, leaning
over the bowl, his legs bending and trembling under
him. His father put one arm around the thin little
body and held his head clumsily with the other hand.
Helen stood by, helplessly sympathetic. Henry
looked so <i>awfully</i> sick when he had those fits of
nausea!</p>

<p>Henry vomited apologetically, as it were, trying
feebly not to spatter any of the ill-smelling liquid
on the bathroom wall or floor. In an instant’s pause
between spasms he rolled his eyes appealingly at
Helen, who sprang to his side.</p>

<p>“... ’mfraid got shome shstairs,” he said
thickly, the words cut short by another agonizing
fit of retching.</p>

<p>Helen darted away. Her father called her back.
“What is it? What did Henry say?” he asked anxiously.
“I’ll get him his medicine as soon as he is
over this. I don’t believe you can reach it. It’s on
that highest shelf.” Helen stood up on tiptoe and
whispered in her father’s ear, “He said he was afraid
he got some on the stairs, and I’m going to wipe
it up.”</p>

<p>Her father nodded his instant understanding.
The little girl flew to the corner closet where the
cleaning cloths were hung and disappeared down the
stairs.</p>

<p>The door to the bedroom opened and Mrs. Knapp
appeared. Her eyes were still red, and her face
very pale; but her expression was of strong, kind
solicitude. She came straight into the bathroom
where Henry stood, half-fainting, wavering from side
to side.</p>

<p>“Oh, poor Henry!” she said. “Here, I’ll take care
of him.”</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp stepped back, self-effacingly, and with
relief. She picked the child up bodily in her strong
arms and carried him into the bedroom where she
laid him on the bed. In an instant she had whisked
out a basin which she held ready with one hand.
“Bring me a wet washcloth, <i>cold</i>,” she said to her
husband, “and a glass of water.” When it came
she wiped Henry’s lips clean, so that with a sigh
of relief he closed his mouth; she held the glass to
his lips, “Rinse out your mouth with this, dear.
It’ll make you feel better.” When the next spasm
came, she supported his forehead firmly, laying his
head back on the pillow afterwards; and, sprinkling
a little eau-de-cologne on a fresh handkerchief, she
wiped the cold sweat from his face.</p>

<p>To lie down had relieved the strain on Henry.
The eau-de-cologne had partly revived him. He began
to look less ghastly; he began to feel less that
this time he was really going to die. He drew
strength consciously from his mother’s calm self-possession.
Nobody could take care of you like
Mother when there was something the matter with
you, he thought.</p>

<p>Mother now turned to inspect the contents of
the basin. “What ever can have upset Henry <i>this</i>
time? I planned that supper specially for him, just
the things he usually digests all right.”</p>

<p>A pause. Then, “What can those dark brown
crumby lumps be?” she asked aloud. “We didn’t
have anything like that for supper.”</p>

<p>Henry rolled his eyes at his father, and then closed
them, weakly, helplessly.</p>

<p>His father said from the door, briefly, “We met
Mattie when we were at Wertheimer’s and she gave
each of the children a cookie.”</p>

<p>“<i>Store</i> cookies?” asked Henry’s mother, more
with an exclamation point than a question.</p>

<p>“The regular ginger cookie ... a small one,”
said her husband.</p>

<p>“Oh,” said Mrs. Knapp.</p>

<p>Behind Mr. Knapp in the obscurity of the hall,
Helen slipped shadow-like, silently as a little mouse,
back towards the closet where the cleaning cloths
were kept. Her father hoped she had remembered
to rinse the cloth well.</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp sat down by Henry. She laid her
hand on his forehead and said, “Mother doesn’t
<i>want</i> to be scolding you all the time, Henry, but
you must try to remember not to eat things away
from home. You know your digestion is very delicate
and you know how Mother tries to have just
the right things for you here. If I do that, give
up everything I’d like to do to stay here and
cook things for you, you ought to be able to remember,
don’t you think, not to eat other things?”</p>

<p>Her tone was reasonable. Her logic was unanswerable.
Henry shrank to even smaller dimensions
as he lay helpless on the bed.</p>

<p>She did not say a word to his father about having
allowed Henry to eat the cookie. She never criticized
their father before the children.</p>

<p>She got up now and put a light warm blanket
over Henry. “Do you suppose you could get
Stephen to bed, Lester?” she asked, over her shoulder.
After he had gone, she sat holding Henry’s
cold little frog’s paw in her warm hands till his circulation
was normal and then helped him undress
and get to bed.</p>

<p>When she went down to the kitchen she found
that Helen and her father had tried to finish the
evening work. The dishes were washed and put
away. Helen was rinsing out the wiping-cloths, and
Lester was sweeping. The clock showed a quarter
of nine.</p>

<p>She looked sharply at what Helen was doing and
plunged towards her with a gesture of impatience.
“Mercy, Helen, don’t be so back<i>handed</i>!” she cried,
snatching a dripping cloth from the child’s hands.
“I’ve told you a thousand times you can’t wring the
water out of anything if you hold it like <i>that</i>!”
She wrung the cloths one after another, her practised
fingers flying like those of a prestidigitator.
“Like <i>that</i>!” she said reprovingly to Helen, shaking
them out and hanging them up to dry.</p>

<p>Seeing in Helen’s face no sign of any increase of
intelligence about wringing out dishcloths, but only
her usual cowed fear of further criticism, she said
in a tone of complete discouragement:</p>

<p>“Oh, well, never mind! You’d better get to bed
now. I’ll be up to rub the turpentine and lard on
your chest by the time you’re undressed.” As the
child trod softly out of the kitchen she threw after
her like a hand-grenade, “Don’t forget your teeth!”</p>

<p>To her husband she said, taking the broom out of
his hand and looking critically back over the floor
he had been sweeping, “Don’t wait for me, Lester.
I’ve got to change the dressings on my arm before
I go to bed.”</p>

<p>“Can’t I help you with that, dear?” asked her
husband.</p>

<p>“No, thank you,” she said. “I can manage all
right.”</p>

<p>As he went out she was reflecting with a satisfaction
that burned like fire that she was not as
other women who “took it out” on their families
when things went wrong. She never made scenes,
not even when she was almost frenzied with irritations.
She never lost her self-control—except of
course once in a while with Stephen, and then never
for more than an instant or two. Until the terrifying
but really unavoidable breakdown of this evening,
no one had ever seen her weep, heavy and
poisonous as were the bitter tears she so frequently
held back. She never forgot to say “thank you”
and “please.” Her heart swelled with an angry
sense of how far beyond criticism she was. Come
what might she would do her duty to the uttermost.</p>

<p>She went up to Helen’s room, silently did the
necessary things for her cold and kissed her good-night,
saying, “<i>Do</i> try to make your bed a little
better, dear. There was a great fold across it to-day
from one corner to the other.”</p>

<p>Then she went downstairs and stepped about the
house, picking up odd things and putting them in
place: her usual evening occupation. As she hung
up Henry’s muffler which lay on the floor at the
foot of the coat-rack in the hall, her eyes fell on
Helen’s coat. She looked at it with mingled pride
and exasperation. There was not a woman of her
acquaintance who could have taken those hopeless
old materials and pieced and turned and fitted and
made such a stylish little garment. She had always
said to herself that no matter how poor they were,
she would die before her little girl should feel humiliated
for the lack of decent clothes. And yet ...
what a strange child Helen was! She had put on
that coat as if it had been any coat, as if she didn’t
realize what a toilsome effort her mother had made
to secure it. But children <i>didn’t</i> realize the sacrifices
you made for them.</p>

<p>She had a moment of complete relaxation and satisfaction
as she dropped into a chair to feast her
eyes on the sofa. What a success it was! Could
anybody recognize it for the old wreck which had
stood out in front of the junk-shop on River Street
all winter! She had seen its lines through its ruin,
had guessed at the fine wood under the many coats
of dishonoring paint. Every inch of it had been re-created
by her hand and brain and purpose.</p>

<p>How sweet of Mattie Farnham to give her that
striped velours to cover it with. She never could
have afforded anything so fine. What lovely, lovely
stuff it was! How she loved beautiful fabrics. Her
face softened to dreaminess as she passed her hand
gently over the smoothly drawn material and
thought with affection of the donor. What a good-hearted
girl Mattie was.</p>

<p>Her children would not have recognized her face
as she sat there loving the sofa and the rich fabric
on it and thinking gratefully of her friend.</p>

<p>But how <i>funny</i> Mattie was about dressing herself!
Was there anybody who had less faculty for
it? A flicker of amusement—the first she had felt
all day—drew her lips into a good-natured smile at
the recollection of that awful hat with the pink
feather which Mattie had wanted to buy. What a
figure of fun she had looked in it! And she knew
it! And yet was hypnotized by the dowdy thing.
All she had needed was the hint to take the small,
dark-blue one that suited her perfectly. How queer
she couldn’t think of it herself.</p>

<p>She loved to go shopping with Mattie—with old
Mrs. Anderson, with any of the ladies in the Guild
who so often asked her advice. It was a real pleasure
to help them select the right things. But—her
softened face tightened and set—how horribly
naughty Stephen was when you tried to take him
into shops. Such disgraceful scenes as she had had
with him when he got tired and impatient.</p>

<p>The clock behind her struck half-past nine, and
she became aware of its ticking once more, its insistent
whisper: “<i>So much to do! So much to do!
So much to do!</i>”</p>

<p>She was very tired and found she had relaxed
wearily into her chair. But she got up with a brisk
energetic motion like a prize-fighter coming out of
his corner. She detested people who moved languidly
and dragged themselves around.</p>

<p>She went into the kitchen and put the oatmeal
into the fireless cooker, and after this waited, polishing
absent-mindedly the nickel towel-bar of the shining
stove, till she heard Lester go out of the bathroom.</p>

<p>Then she went swiftly up the stairs, locked the
bathroom door behind her, and began to unwind
the bandages from around her upper arm. When it
finally came off she inspected the raw patch on her
arm. It was crusted over in places, with thick, yellowish-white
pus oozing from the pustules. It was
spreading. It was worse. It would never be any
better. It was like everything else.</p>

<p>She spread a salve on it with practised fingers,
wound a fresh bandage about her arm, fastened it
firmly and then washed her hands over and over,
scrubbing them mercilessly with a stiff brush till
they were raw. She always felt unclean to her
bones after she had seen one of those frequently
recurring eczema eruptions on her skin. She never
spoke of them unless some one asked her a question
about her health. She felt disgraced by their loathsomeness,
although no one but she and the doctor
ever saw them. She often called it to herself, “the
last straw.”</p>

<p>Her nightgown hung on the bathroom door. They
usually dressed and undressed here not to disturb
Stephen who still slept in their bedroom, because
there was no other corner in the little house for him.
And now they would <i>never</i> be able to move to a
larger house where they could live decently and
have a room apiece, to a better part of town where
the children would have decent playmates. <i>Never</i>
anything but this....</p>

<p>She began to undress rapidly and to wash. As
she combed her dark hair, she noticed again how
rapidly it was falling. The comb was full of long
hairs. She took them out and rolled them up into
a coil. She supposed she ought to save her combings
to make a switch against the inevitable time
when her hair would be too thin to do up. And
she had had such <i>beautiful</i> hair! It had been her
one physical superiority, that and her “style.”
What good had they ever done her!</p>

<p>She began to think of the frightening moment in
the kitchen that evening, when for an instant she
had lost her bitterly fought-for self-control, when
the taut cable of her will-power had snapped under
the strain put upon it. For a wild instant she
had been all one inner clamor to die, to die, to lay
down the heavy, heavy burden, too great for her to
bear. What was her life? A hateful round of
housework, which, hurry as she might, was never
done. How she <i>loathed</i> housework! The sight of
a dishpan full of dishes made her feel like screaming
out. And what else did she have? Loneliness;
never-ending monotony; blank, gray days, one after
another, full of drudgery. No rest from the constant
friction over the children’s carelessness and forgetfulness
and childishness! How she hated childishness!
And she must try to endure it patiently or
at least with the appearance of patience. Sometimes,
in black moments like this, it seemed to her that
she had such <i>strange</i> children, not like other people’s,
easy to understand and manage, strong, normal
children. Helen ... there didn’t seem to be
anything <i>to</i> Helen! With the exasperation which
passivity always aroused in her, Helen’s mother
thought of the dumb vacant look on Helen’s face
that evening when she had tried to show her how
to perform a simple operation a little less clumsily.
Sometimes it seemed as though Helen were not all
<i>there</i>! And Henry with that nervous habit of
questioning everything everybody said and the absent-mindedness
which made him do such idiotic
things....</p>

<p>A profound depression came upon her. These
were the moments in a mother’s life about which
nobody ever warned you, about which everybody
kept a deceitful silence, the fine books and the
speakers who had so much to say about the sacredness
of maternity. They never told you that there
were moments of arid clear sight when you saw
helplessly that your children would never measure
up to your standard, never would be really close to
you, because they were not your kind of human beings,
because they were not <i>your</i> children, but
merely other human beings for whom you were responsible.
How solitary it made you feel!</p>

<p>And Stephen....</p>

<p>It frightened her to think of Stephen. What
could you do for a child who <i>wanted</i> to be bad,
and told you so in a loud scream? How could you
manage a child whom no arguments touched, who
went off like a dynamite bomb over everything and
nothing; who was capable of doing as he did this
afternoon, rushing right at his own mother in a
passion, trying to bite and scratch and tear her
flesh like a little wild beast?</p>

<p>And yet she had never spoiled Stephen because
he was the baby of the family. She had always
been firm with him just as she had with the others.
Every one in her circle agreed that she had never
spoiled him. What future could there be for
Stephen? If he was like this at five, what would
he be at fifteen, with all those slum boys at hand
to play with? She couldn’t <i>always</i> keep them away
from him.</p>

<p>If they could only move to another part of town,
the nice part, where the children would have nice
playmates! But now she knew they never would.
With this last complete failure of poor Lester’s to
make good, she touched bottom, knew hopelessness.
There never would be anything else for her, never,
never! How <i>could</i> Lester take things lying down
as he did! When there were all those tragic reasons
for his forging ahead? Why <i>didn’t</i> he do as other
men did, all other men who amounted to anything,
even common laboring men—get on, succeed, provide
for his family!</p>

<p>It was not lack of intelligence or education. He
had always been crazy about books and education.
What good did Lester’s intelligence and education
do them? It was just that he didn’t care enough
about them to <i>try</i>!</p>

<p>Well, she would never complain. She despised
wives who complained of their husbands. She had
never said a word against Lester and she never
would. Even to-night, at the table, struck down
as she had been by that blow, that fatal blow, so
casually, so indifferently announced, she had not
breathed a word of blame. Not one!</p>

<p>But it was bitter! Bitter! She was fit for something
better than scrubbing floors all her life. Her
dark face in the mirror looked out at her, blazing.
She looked as Stephen did when he was being
whipped. She looked wicked. She felt wicked.
But she did not want to be wicked. She wanted to
be a good Christian woman. She wanted to do her
duty. She began to pray, fervently, “O God,
help me bear my burdens! God, make me strong
to do my duty! God, take out the wild, sinful anger
from my heart and give me patience to do what I
must do! O God, help me to be a good mother!”</p>

<p>The right spring had been touched. Her children!
She must live for her children. And she
loved them, she did live for them! What were those
little passing moments of exasperation! Nothing,
compared to the passion for them which shook her
like a great wind, whenever they were sick, whenever
she felt how greatly they needed her. And
how they did need her! Helen, with her delicate
lungs, her impracticality, her helplessness—what
could she do without her mother to take care of
her? And Stephen—she shuddered to think of
the rage into which some women would fly when
Stephen was in one of his bad moods. Nobody but
his own mother could be trusted to resist the white
heat of anger which his furies aroused in the person
trying to care for him. And Henry, poor little darling
Henry! Who else would take the trouble, day
by day, to provide just the right food for him? See
what that one cookie had done to him this evening!
Why, if Mattie Farnham had the care of that child,
she and her delicatessen-store stuff....</p>

<p>Henry’s mother swiftly braided up her thinning
hair. Her face was calmer. She was planning what
she would give him for lunch the next day.</p>




<h3>Chapter 3</h3>


<p>“DON’T you want to sit by the window here,
Mrs. Farnham?” suggested Mrs. Prouty,
the rector’s wife. “The light’ll be better for your
sewing. That dark material is hard on the eyes.”</p>

<p>All the Ladies’ Guild understood that Mrs. Farnham
was being posted there to give the alarm when
Mrs. Knapp turned into the walk leading to the
Parish House, and they went on talking with an
agreeable sense of security.</p>

<p>“It’s pretty hard on those Willing’s Emporium
people, I say,” Mrs. Prouty remarked, “after years
of faithful service, to have everything turned topsy-turvy
over their heads by a young whippersnapper.
They say he’s going to change the store all around
too; put the Ladies’ Cloak Department upstairs
where the shoes always were; and he’s taken that
top floor that old Mr. Willing rented to the Knights
of Pythias and is going to add some new departments.
A body won’t know where to find a thing!
In my opinion he’ll live to regret it.”</p>

<p>They all reflected silently that if the young Mr.
Willing had only been an Episcopalian like his defunct
uncle, instead of a Presbyterian, Mrs. Prouty
might not have taken the change of the Ladies’ Cloak
Department quite so hard.</p>

<p>“Poor Mrs. Knapp feels simply terrible about her
husband’s not being promoted,” said Mrs. Merritt,
the doctor’s wife. “I saw her yesterday at Wertheimer’s
for an instant. Not that she said anything.
She wouldn’t, you know, not if she died for
it. But you could feel it. All over her. And no
wonder!”</p>

<p>“Poor thing!” (Mrs. Prouty had acquired the
full, solicitous intonation of the parish visitor.)
“She has many burdens to bear. Mr. Prouty often
says that in these days it is wonderful to see a
woman so devoted to her duty as a home-maker.
She simply gives up her whole life to her family!
Absolutely!”</p>

<p>“The children are such delicate little things, too,
a constant care.” Mrs. Merritt snatched the opportunity
to display her inside information. “There’s
hardly a week that Doctor isn’t called in there for
one or another of them. He often tells me that <i>he</i>
doesn’t know what to do for them. They don’t seem
to have anything to do <i>with</i>! No digestions, no constitutions.
Just like their father. All but little
Stephen. He’s <i>strong</i> enough!”</p>

<p>“He’s a perfect imp of darkness!” cried old Mrs.
Anderson, lifting her thin gray face from her sewing.
“I’ve raised a lot of children in my day and
seen a lot more, but I never saw such a naughty
contrary child as he is in all my born days. Nor
so hateful! He never does anything unless it’s to
plague somebody by it. The other day, in the last
thaw it was, I’d just got my back porch mopped up
after the grocer’s boy—you know how he tracks
mud in—and I heard somebody fussing around out
there, and I opened the door quick, and there was
Stephen Knapp lugging over a great pail of mud
to dump it on my porch. He’d dumped one already
and got it all spread out on the boards. I said,
‘Why, Stephen Knapp, what makes you do such a
bad thing?’ I was really paralyzed to see him at it.
‘What <i>makes</i> you be so bad, Stephen?’ I said. And
he said—he’s got the hardest, coolest way of saying
those wicked things—he said, as cool as you please,
‘’Tause I hate you, Mis’ Anderson, ’tause I hate
you.’ And gave me that black look of his....”</p>

<p>Through the tepid, stagnant air of the room
flickered a sulphurous zig-zag of passion. The
women shrank back from it, horrified and fascinated.</p>

<p>“Mr. Prouty says,” quoted his wife, “that Stephen
Knapp makes him think of the old Bible stories
about people possessed of the devil. His mother
is at her wit’s end. Mr. Prouty says she has asked
him to help her with prayer. And Stephen gets
worse all the time. And yet she’s always perfectly
firm with him, never spoils him. And it’s wonderful,
her iron self-control when he is in one of his
tempers. I never could keep <i>my</i> temper like that.
It can’t be due to anything about the way she manages
him, for she never had a particle of trouble with
the other two. Well, it’ll be a great relief to her,
as she often says, when he goes to school with the
others.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Merritt now said, lowering her voice, “You
know she has a chronic skin trouble too that she
never says anything about.”</p>

<p>“Like St. Paul, Mr. Prouty says.”</p>

<p>“Doctor has tried everything to cure it. Diet.
Electricity. X-rays. All the salves in the drugstores.
Oh, no,” she explained hastily in answer to
an unspoken thought somewhere in the room. “Oh,
<i>no</i>, it’s nothing <i>horrid</i>! Her husband is a <i>nice</i>
enough man, as far as that goes. Doctor thinks it
may be nervous, may be due to....”</p>

<p>“Nervous!” cried Mrs. Mattie Farnham. “Why,
it’s a real eruption, discharging pus and everything.
I had to help her dress a place on her back once
when Stephen was a tiny baby. Nervous!”</p>

<p>“Oh, Doctor doesn’t mean it is anything she could
help. He often says that just because you’ve called
a thing nervous is no reason for thinking it’s not
serious. It’s as real to <i>them</i>, he says, as a broken
leg.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’d have something worse than eczema if
I had three delicate children to bring up and only
that broken reed of a Lester Knapp to lean on,” said
Mrs. Prouty with energy. “They tell me that he all
but lost his job in the shake-up at Willing’s—let
alone not getting advanced. Young Mrs. Willing
told Mr. Prouty that her husband told her that he’d
be blessed if he knew anything Lester Knapp <i>would</i>
be good for—unless teaching poetry, maybe. Young
Mrs. Willing is a Churchwoman, you know. It’s
only her husband who is a Presbyterian. That’s
how she happened to be talking to Mr. Prouty. She
was telling him that if it depended on <i>her</i> which
church....”</p>

<p>“He’s a <i>nice</i> man, Lester Knapp is,” broke in
Mrs. Farnham stoutly. “You know we’re sort of
related. His sister married my husband’s brother.
The children call me Aunt. When you come to know
Lester he’s a real nice man. And he’s a smart man
too, in his way. When he was at the State University
he was considered one of the best students
there, I’ve always heard ’em say. If he hadn’t
married so young, he was lotting on being....”
Her tone changed suddenly—“Oh, Mrs. Merritt, do
you think I ought to hem this or face it?”</p>

<p>“It’d be pretty bungling to hem, wouldn’t it?”
Mrs. Merritt responded on the same note, “such
heavy material—to turn <i>in</i> the hem, anyhow.
Maybe you could feather-stitch it down—oh, how
do you <i>do</i>, Mrs. Knapp? So glad to see you out.
But then you’re one of the faithful ones, as Mr.
Prouty always says.”</p>

<p>They all looked up from their work, smiling earnestly
at her, drawing their needles in and out
rapidly, and Evangeline Knapp knew from the expression
of their eyes that they had been talking of
her, of Lester’s failure to make good; that they had
been pitying her from their superior position of
women whose husbands were good providers.</p>

<p>She resented their pity—and yet it was a comfort
to her. She loved coming to these weekly meetings
of the Guild, the only outings of her life, and
always went home refreshed and strengthened by
her contact with people who looked at things as she
did. She passed her life in solitary confinement, as
home-makers always do, with a man who naturally
looked at things from a man’s standpoint (and in
her case from a very queer standpoint of his own)
and with children who could not in the nature of
things share a single interest of hers; it was an
inexpressible relief to her to have these weekly
glimpses of human beings who talked of things she
liked, who had her standards and desires.</p>

<p>She <i>liked</i> women, anyhow, and had the deepest
sympathy for their struggle to arrange in a decent
pattern the crude masculine and crude childish raw
material of their home-lives. She liked too the respect
of these women for her, the way they all asked
her advice, and saved up perplexities for her to
solve. To-day, for instance, she had scarcely taken
out her thimble when Mrs. Prouty passed over a
sample of blue material to ask whether it was really
linen as claimed—when anybody with an eye in her
head could see that it was not even a very good
imitation. After that, Mrs. Merritt said she had
noticed that Paisley effects were coming in. Would
it be possible to drape one of those old shawls—she
had a lovely one from her grandmother—to make
a cloak—to simulate the wide-sleeved effect—without
cutting it, you know—of course you wouldn’t
want to <i>cut</i> it!</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp said she would think it over, and
as she rapidly basted the collar on the child’s dress
she was making, she concentrated her inner vision
on the problem. She saw it as though it were there—the
great square of richly patterned fabric. She
draped it in imagination this way and that. No,
that would be too bungling at the neck—perhaps
drawn up in the middle....</p>

<p>They felt her absorption and preserved a respectful
silence, sewing and glancing up occasionally
at her inward-looking face to see how she was progressing.
Their own minds were quite relaxed and
vacant. Mrs. Knapp had taken up the problem.
What need for any one else to think of it? They
had such confidence in Mrs. Knapp.</p>

<p>Presently, “I believe you could do it this way,
Mrs. Merritt,” she said. “Mrs. Anderson, hand me
that piece of sateen, will you, please. See, this is
your shawl. You make a fold in the middle, so,
half-way up—and catch it between with a....”
They laid down their work to give their whole attention
to her explanation, their eyes following her
fingers, their minds accepting her conclusions without
question.</p>

<p>She felt very happy, very warm, very kind. She
loved being able to help Mrs. Merritt out this way.
Dr. Merritt was such a splendid doctor and so good
always to Henry and Helen. And she loved helping
somebody to make use of something, to rescue something
fine, as she had rescued the sofa. It would
be a beautiful, beautiful cloak, especially with Mrs.
Merritt’s mink neckpiece made over into a collar, a
detail that came into her mind like an inspiration as
she talked.</p>

<p>Yes, she was very happy the afternoons when
the Guild met.</p>



<p>Mr. Prouty usually brought his rosy-gilled face
and round collar into the Guild Room before the
group broke up and chatted with the ladies over
the cup of tea which ended their meetings. He had
something on his mind to-day—that was evident to
every one of those married women the instant he
stepped into the room. But he did not bring it out
at once, making pleasant conversation with the preoccupied
dexterity of an elderly clergyman. As he
talked, he looked often at Mrs. Knapp’s dark intense
face, bent over her work. She never stopped for
tea. And when he said in his well-known, colloquial,
facetious way, “Ladies, I’ve got a big job for you.
Take a brace. I’m going to shoot!” it was towards
Mrs. Knapp that he spoke.</p>

<p>He tried to address himself to them all equally as
he made his appeal, but unconsciously he turned
almost constantly to the keen attentive eyes which
never left his for an instant as he talked. He spoke
earnestly, partly because he feared lest the Presbyterians
might steal a march on him, and partly because
of a very real sympathy with the wretched
children whose needs he was describing. When he
finished, they all waited for Mrs. Knapp to speak.</p>

<p>She said firmly, “There’s just one thing to do. A
good visiting nurse attached to our parish work is
the only way we could get anywhere. Anything else—baskets
of food, volunteer visiting—they never
amount to a row of pins.”</p>

<p>The feeble, amateur, fumbling plans which they
were beginning to formulate fell to earth. But they
were aghast at her.</p>

<p>“A <i>nurse</i>! How ever could we get the money to
pay one?”</p>

<p>“Only big-city parishes can hope to....”</p>

<p>“We could if we <i>tried</i>!” she said, quelling them by
her accent. She looked around at them with burning
eyes. She was like a falcon in a barnyard. “A
visiting nurse would cost—let us say a thousand a
year.”</p>

<p>“Oh, more than that!” cried Mr. Prouty.</p>

<p>“Not if we supplied her with lodging and heat.
Why couldn’t we arrange the little storeroom at the
head of the stairs here in the Parish House for a
bedroom for her? We could....”</p>

<p>“How could you heat it? There’s no radiator
there.”</p>

<p>“There’s a steam-riser goes through that room. I
noticed it when we were putting the folding chairs
away last week. That would make it warm enough.
We could furnish it by contributions, without its
costing a cent in cash. Everybody has at least one
piece of furniture she could spare from her house—in
such a cause. About the pay, now. We
have more than four hundred dollars in the Ladies’
Guild Treasury, and next Christmas our Bazaar
ought to bring in two hundred more; it always does.
We could hire Hunt’s Hall on Union Street for it,
and have the bazaar bigger, and make more than
two hundred easily. Then, there’s Miss Jelliffe, the
music supervisor in the public schools, you know.
Now that she’s joined St. Peter’s, I’m very sure she
would help us get up some concerts later on. We
could give ‘Songs of All Countries’ in costume, with
the children. When you have lots of children in a
program, you can always sell tickets. Their folks
want to see them. And we could get a certain
amount from the poor families the nurse visits—perhaps
enough to make up the rest of her salary.
They’d appreciate the service more if they paid
something for it. Folks do.”</p>

<p>All this had poured from her effortlessly, as if
she had been simply pointing out what lay there
to see, not as though she were beating her brains to
invent it.</p>

<p>They gaped at her breathlessly.</p>

<p>“I wish you would be chairman of the Committee,”
said Mr. Prouty deferentially, “and take charge
of the campaign for funds.”</p>

<p>Her face which had been for an instant clear and
open, clouded and shut. “I’d <i>love</i> to!” she said passionately.
“I see it all!” She began to roll her
sewing together as though to give herself time to
be able to speak more calmly. “But I mustn’t think
of it,” she said at last. “I have too much to do at
home. It’s all I can manage to get to church and
to Guild meeting once a week. I never leave the
house for anything else except to go to market. I
can take Stephen with me there. Of course, after
he starts going to school....”</p>

<p>Yes, they all knew what a relief it was when the
children started going to school, and you could keep
the house in some kind of order, and have a little
peace.</p>

<p>Their silent, sympathetic understanding brought
out from her now something she had not meant to
say, something which had been like a lump of lead
on her heart, the dread that her only open door,
would soon close upon her. “Even for Guild-meetings,”
she said, speaking grimly to keep her lips from
trembling, “I may have to give them up, too. Mr.
Knapp has always been able to make an arrangement
to get away from the store an hour and a half
earlier on Thursdays to stay with Stephen and the
other two after school. But I don’t know whether
he will be able to manage that now. Mr. Willing, I
mean old Mr. Willing saw no objection. But
now....”</p>

<p>Her voice was harsh and dry; but they all knew
why. And she was quite aware of the silent glosses
and commentaries she knew them to be supplying
mentally. She pinned her roll of sewing together
firmly. Nobody could put in a pin with her gesture
of mastery. “My first duty is to my home and
children,” she said.</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, oh, yes, we all know that, of course.”
Mr. Prouty gave to the aphorism a lip-service which
scantily covered his bitter objection to it in this case.</p>

<p>“Our circumstances don’t permit us to hire help,”
she added, making this resolutely a statement of fact
and not a complaint. “I do the washings, you
know.”</p>

<p>“I know. Wonderful! Wonderful!” said Mr.
Prouty irritably.</p>

<p>“She sets an example to us all, I always tell ’em,”
said Mrs. Farnham.</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed you <i>do</i>, Mrs. Knapp!” they all
agreed fervently. Evangeline knew that this was
their way of trying to make up to her for having a
poor stick of a husband. She savored their compassion
with a bitter-sweet mixture of humiliation
over her need for it and of triumph that she had
drawn this sympathy from them under the appearance
of repelling it. “Nobody ever heard <i>me</i> complain!”
she was saying to herself.</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll do what I can,” she said, standing up
to go. “I’ll think of things. I’ve just thought of
another. If we can provide the nurse with dinner
every day, that ought to cut down on cash expenses.
There are twenty-four members of the Guild.
That’d hardly mean more than one dinner a month
for each of us. And it would cut off fifteen dollars
a month from the money we’d have to provide. And
in that way we could keep in closer touch with her.
Seeing her every day and hearing about her work,
we’d be more apt to coöperate with her right along.”</p>

<p>“Splendid! Simply splendid!” cried Mr. Prouty.
“We will be the only parish of our size in the State
to have a visiting nurse of our own.” He saw himself
at the next diocesan meeting the center of a
group of envious clergymen, expounding to them the
ingenious devices by which this remarkable result
had been achieved. He had had a good deal of
this sort of gratification since the Knapps had moved
into his parish.</p>





<h3>Chapter 4</h3>


<p>“Who swoon in sleep and awake wearier.”</p>

<p>As he woke up, Lester Knapp heard the words in
the air as he so often heard poetry,</p>

<p>“... and awake wearier!”</p>

<p>He was tired to the bone. He would have given
anything in the world to turn over, bury his face
in the pillow and swoon to sleep again.</p>

<p>And never wake up!</p>

<p>But the alarm-clock had rung, and Evangeline had
risen instantly. He heard her splashing in the bathroom
now.</p>

<p>With an effort as though he were struggling out
of smothering black depths, he sat up and swung
his feet over the edge of the bed. Gosh! How little
good he seemed to get from his sleep. He was
tireder when he woke up than when he went to bed.</p>

<p>On the cot opposite little Stephen lay sleeping
as vigorously as he did everything, one tightly
clenched small fist flung up on his pillow. What a
strong, handsome kid he was. Whatever could be
the matter with him to make him act so like the
devil? Strange to see a <i>little</i> kid like that, so hateful,
seem to take such a satisfaction in raising hell.</p>

<p>Well, there was the furnace fire to fix. He thrust
his feet into slippers, put his dressing-gown over his
pyjamas and shuffled downstairs, hearing behind him
the firm, regular step of Evangeline as she went from
the bathroom to the bedroom. On the way down
he woke up enough to realize what made life look
so specially intolerable that morning; the return of
Jerome Willing and his own definite failure to make
good in the new organization of the store. The significance
of that and all that it foretold stood out
more harshly than ever in the pale, dawn-gray of
the cold empty kitchen. Oh, hell!</p>

<p>He flung open the cellar door and ran downstairs
to run away from the thought. But it was waiting
for him, blackly in the coal-bin, luridly in the firebox.</p>

<p>“It looks just about like the jumping-off place for
me,” he thought, rattling the furnace-shaker gloomily;
“only I can’t jump. Where to?”</p>

<p>Well, anyhow, in the few minutes before breakfast,
while his stomach was empty, he was free from
that dull leaden mass of misery turning over and
over inside him at intervals, which was the usual accompaniment
of his every waking hour. That was
<i>some</i>thing to be thankful for.</p>

<p>He strained his lean arms to throw the coal from
his shovel well back into the firebox, and leveled it
evenly with the long poker. Evangeline always
found time to go down to see if he had done it right
before he got away after breakfast.</p>

<p>Then he stood for a moment, struck as he often
was, by the leaping many-tongued fury of the little
pale-blue pointed flames. He looked at them, fascinated
by the baleful lustfulness of their attack on
the helpless lumps of coal thrown into their inferno.</p>

<p>“The seat of desolation, void of light</p>
<p>Save what the glimmering of those livid flames</p>
<p>Casts, pale and dreadful. Yet from those flames</p>
<p>No light, but rather darkness visible,</p>
<p>Serves only to discover sights of woe.”</p>


<p>He heard the words crackle in the flames. He
said to himself gravely: “Sights of woe it surely is.”</p>

<p>He heard Evangeline begin to rattle the shaker
of the kitchen stove and started from his hypnotized
stare at the flames. It was time for him to beat it
back upstairs if he didn’t want to be late. How he
loathed his life-long slavery to the clock, that pervasive
intimate negative opposed to every spontaneous
impulse. “It’s the clock that is the nay-sayer
to life,” he thought, as he climbed the cellar
stairs. He hurried upstairs, dressed and began to
shave.</p>

<p>In the midst of this last operation he heard lagging,
soft little footsteps come into the bathroom
behind him, and beyond his own lathered face in
the glass he saw Stephen enter. Unconscious of
observation, the little boy was gazing absently out
of the window at the snow-covered branches of the
maple tree. His father was so much surprised by
the expression of that round baby face and so much
interested in it that he stopped shaving, his razor
in the air, peering at his little son through the glass
darkly. Stephen was looking <i>wistful</i>! Yes, he was!
Wistful and appealing! Wasn’t his lower lip quivering
a little as though....</p>

<p>Stephen caught his father’s eye on him and started
in surprise at being seen by somebody whose back
was towards him.</p>

<p>“Hello there, Stevie,” said his father in an inviting
tone. “How’s the old man to-day?”</p>

<p>Yes, Stephen’s lower lip <i>was</i> quivering! He came
closer now and stood looking up earnestly into the
soapy face of his father. “Say, Father,” he began,
“you know my Teddy-bear—you <i>know</i> how....”</p>

<p>From below came a clear, restrained voice stating
dispassionately, “Lester, you have only twelve minutes
before it’s time to leave the house.” And then
rebukingly, “Stephen, you <i>must</i>n’t bother Father in
the mornings when he has to hurry so. Either go
back to bed this minute and keep warm or get
dressed at once. You’ll take cold standing around
in your pyjamas.”</p>

<p>The tone was reasonable. The logic unanswerable.
But unlike Henry, Stephen did not shrink
to smaller proportions under the reason and the
logic. With the first sound of his mother’s voice,
his usual square-jawed, pugnacious little mask had
dropped over his face. “I’ll get dwessed when I get
a-good-a-weady!” he announced loudly and belligerently,
refreshed by his night’s sleep and instantly
ready to raise an issue and fight it out.</p>

<p>“<i>Stephen!</i>” came from below in awful tones.
Stephen sauntered away back into the bedroom with
ostentatious leisureliness, his face black and scowling.
Mother had once more stolen Teddy away from
him during the night.</p>

<p>Lester finished shaving in three or four swipes of
his razor, put on his collar at top speed and tied his
necktie as he ran downstairs, cursing the clock
and all its works under his breath. Stephen had
been on the point of <i>saying</i> something to him, something
human, Stephen who never asked a question
or made an advance towards any one, Stephen who
lived in a state of moral siege, making sorties from
his stronghold only to harry the enemy. And the
accursed matter of punctuality had once more frozen
out a human relationship. He never had <i>time</i> to
know his children, to stalk and catch that exquisitely
elusive bird-of-paradise, their confidence. Lester
had long ago given up any hope of having time
enough to do other things that seemed worth while,
to read the books he liked, to meditate, to try to
understand anything. But it did seem that in the
matter of his own children....</p>

<p>“I didn’t think you’d need your overshoes this
morning, Lester. I didn’t get them out. But if you
think you would better....”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, no, dear, I won’t. I hate them anyhow.”</p>

<p>His breakfast, perfectly cooked and served,
steamed on the white tablecloth. What a wonder
of competence Eva was! Only it was a pity she
let the children get on her nerves so. Lester never
doubted that his wife loved her children with all
the passion of her fiery heart, but there were times
when it occurred to him that she did not like them
very well—not for long at a time, anyhow. But,
like everything else, that was probably his fault, because
she had all the drudgery of the care of them,
because she never had a rest from them, because
he had not been able to make money enough.
Everything came back to that.</p>

<p>He gulped down his hot, clear coffee and tore at
his well-made toast, thinking that he was just about
a dead loss anyway you looked at it. Not only had
he no money to give his children, but no health
either. That was another reason why Eva was so
worn and took life so hard. He had given her sickly
children—all but Stephen. And Stephen had other
ways of wearing on his mother. Poor little Henry!
How sick he had been last night! It was damnable
that the poor kid should have inherited from his
good-for-nothing father the curse of a weak digestion,
which made life not worth living—that and
many other things.</p>

<p>He snatched his watch, relentless inquisitor, from
the table beside his plate, thrust it into his pocket
and jumped up to put on his overcoat and hat.</p>

<p>“Here are your gloves,” said his wife, holding
them out to him. “There was a hole in the finger.
I’ve just mended it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s awfully good of you, Evie,” said
Lester, kissing her cheek and feeling another ton
of never-to-be-redeemed indebtedness flung on his
shoulders. He felt them bend weakly under it like
a candle in an over-heated room.</p>

<p>“Don’t forget your soda-mints,” said Evangeline.</p>

<p>Gee! it wasn’t likely he would forget them, with
that hideous demon of dull discomfort getting to
work the instant he swallowed food.</p>

<p>Henry and Helen, half-dressed, came hurrying
down the stairs to see him before he disappeared for
the day. His heart yearned over them, their impressionable,
delicate faces, their shadowed eyes,
the shrinking carriage of their slim little bodies.</p>

<p>“Good-by, Father,” they said, lifting their sweet
children’s lips to his. The poor kids! What business
had he to pass on the curse of existence to
other human beings, too sensitive and frail to find it
anything but a doom. He tried to say, “Good-by
there, young ones,” as he kissed them, but the words
could not pass the knot in his throat.</p>

<p>He saw Eva start up the stairs and, knowing that
she was going to have it out with Stephen, crammed
his hat on his head and ran. But not fast enough.
As he fled down the porch steps he heard a combative
angry roar. Helen and Henry would eat
their breakfast to a cheerful tune! And then another
scream, more furious, on a higher note. Hell
and damnation! There must be something wrong
with the way that kid was treated to make life one
perpetual warfare. But his father was as helpless
to intervene as if he were bound and gagged.</p>

<p>Well, he <i>was</i> bound and gagged to complete helplessness
about everything in his life and his children’s
lives, bound and gagged by his inability to
make money. Only men who made money had any
right to say how things should go in their homes.
A man who couldn’t make money had no rights of
any kind which a white man was bound to respect—nor
a white woman either. Especially a white
woman. The opinion of a man who couldn’t make
money was of no value, on any subject, in anybody’s
eyes. The dignity of a man who could not make
money—but why talk about non-existent abstractions?
He had about as much dignity left him as
a zero with the rim off.</p>

<p>His after-breakfast dyspepsia began to roll crushingly
over his personality as it always did for a
couple of hours after each meal. His vitality began
to ebb. He felt the familiar, terrible draining out
of his will-to-live. At the thought of enduring this
demoralizing torment that morning, and that afternoon,
and the day after that and the day after that,
he felt like flinging himself on the ground rolling
and shrieking. Instead he pulled out his watch
with the employee’s nervous gesture and quickened
his pace. He was just then passing Dr. Merritt’s
office. If only there was something the doctor could
do to help him. But he’d tried everything. And
anyhow, he understood perfectly that a man who
doesn’t make money has no right to complain of
dyspepsia—of anything. Illness only adds to his
guilt.</p>

<p>He put a soda-mint in his mouth, turned a corner
and saw, down the street, the four-story brick front
of Willing’s Emporium. Was it possible that a human
being could hate anything as he hated that
sight and not drop dead of it? Before this new
phase it had been bad enough, all those years when
it had been a stagnant pool of sour, slow intrigue
and backbiting, carried on by sour, slow, small-minded
people, all playing in their different ways on
the small-minded, sick old man at the head of it.
Lester had always felt that he would rather die than
either join in those intrigues or combat them. This
aloofness, added to his real incapacity for business,
had left him still nailed to the same high stool in
the same office which had received him the day he
had first gone in. That first day when, vibrant with
the excitement of his engagement to that flame-like
girl, he had left his University classes and all his
plans for the future and rushed out to find work,
any work that would enable him to marry! Well,
he had married. That had been only thirteen years
ago! The time before it seemed to Lester as remote
as the age of Rameses.</p>

<p>He had hated the slow régime of the sick, small-minded
old man, but he hated still more this new
régime which was anything but slow. He detested
the very energy and forcefulness with which Jerome
Willing was realizing his ideals, because he detested
those ideals. Lester felt that he knew what those
ideals were, what lay behind those “pep” talks to
the employees. Jerome Willing’s notion of being a
good business-man was to stalk the women of his
region, as a hunter stalks unsuspecting game, to
learn how to catch them unawares, and how to play
for his own purposes on a weakness of theirs only
too tragically exaggerated already, their love for
buying things. Jerome Willing’s business ideal, as
Lester saw it, was to seize on one of the lower human
instincts, the desire for material possessions, to feed
it, to inflame it, to stimulate it till it should take on
the monstrous proportions of a universal monomania.
A city full of women whose daily occupation
would be buying things, and things, and more
things yet (the things Jerome Willing had to sell,
be it understood): that was Jerome Willing’s vision
of good business. And to realize this vision he joyfully
and zestfully bent all the very considerable
powers of his well-developed personality. Lester
Knapp, the barely tolerated clerk, hurrying humbly
down the street to take up his small drudging task,
gazed at that life-purpose as he had gazed at the
lurid baleful energy of the coal-flames half an hour
before.</p>

<p>Lester did not so much mind the way this subtly
injected poison ate into the fibers of childless women.
They might, for all he cared, let their insane hankering
for a cloak with the “new sleeves” force them
to put blood-money into buying it, and allow their
drugged desire for such imbecile things to wall them
in from the bright world of impersonal lasting satisfactions.
They hurt nobody but themselves. If
the Jerome Willings of the world were smart enough
to make fools of them, so much the worse for them.
Although the spectacle was hardly an enlivening one
for a dyspeptic man forced to pass his life in contact
with it.</p>

<p>But what sickened Lester was the unscrupulous
exploitation of the home-making necessity, the adroit
perversion of the home-making instinct. Jerome
Willing wanted to make it appear, hammering in the
idea with all the ingenious variations of his advertising
copy, that home-making had its beginning
and end in good furniture, fine table linen, expensive
rugs.... God! how about keeping alive some
intellectual or spiritual passion in the home? How
about the children? Did anybody suggest to women
that they give to understanding their children a tenth
part of the time and real intelligence and real purposefulness
they put into getting the right clothes
for them? A tenth? A hundredth! The living,
miraculous, infinitely fragile fabric of the little human
souls they lived with—did they treat that with
the care and deft-handed patience they gave to
their filet-ornamented table linen? No, they wrung
it out hard and hung it up to dry as they did their
dishcloths.</p>

<p>And of course what Jerome Willing wanted of
every employee was to join with all his heart in
this conspiracy to force women still more helplessly
into this slavery to possessions. Any one who could
trick a hapless woman into buying one more thing
she had not dreamed of taking, he was the hero of
the new régime! That was what Jerome Willing
meant when he talked about “making good.” Making
good what? Not good human beings! That
was the last thing anybody was to think of. And
as to trying to draw out from children any greatness
of soul that might lie hidden under their immaturity....</p>

<p>“You’re late again, Mr. Knapp,” said Harvey
Bronson’s voice, rejoicing in the accusation.</p>

<p>Lester Knapp acknowledged his three-minute
crime by a nervous start of astonishment and then
by a fatigued nod of his head. All the swelling
fabric of his thoughts fell in a sodden heap, amounting
to nothing at all, as usual. He hung up his
coat and hat and sat down on the same old stool.
He was no good; that was the matter with him—the
whole matter. He was just no good at all—for
anything. What right had he to criticize anybody
at all, when anybody at all amounted to more
than he! He was a man who couldn’t get on in
business, who couldn’t even get to his work on time.
He must have been standing on the sidewalk outside,
not knowing where he was, lost in that hot
sympathy with childhood. But nine o’clock is not
the time to feel sympathy with anything. Nine
o’clock is sacred to the manipulation of a card catalogue
of customers’ bills.</p>

<p>The spiked ball within him gave another lurch
and tore at his vitals. Lord, how sick of life that
dyspepsia made you! It took the very heart out
of you so that, like a man on the rack, you were
willing to admit anything your accusers asserted.
He admitted thus what everybody tacitly asserted,
that the trouble was all with him, with his weakness,
with his feeble vitality, with his futile disgusts at
the organization of the world he lived in, with his
unmanly failure to seize other men by the throat
and force out of them the things his family needed.</p>

<p>Sympathy for childhood nothing! If he felt any
real sympathy for his own children, he’d somehow
get more money to give them. What were fathers
for, if not for that? If he were a “man among
men,” he would do as other manly men did: use
his wits to force the mothers of other children to
spend more money than they ought on material
possessions and thus have that money to spend in
giving more material possessions to his own.</p>

<p>And even the bitter way he phrased his surrender—yes,
he knew that everybody would say that it
was a weak man’s sour-grapes denunciation of what
he was not strong enough to get. And they would
be right. It was.</p>

<p>He bent his long, lean, sallow face over the desk,
looking disdainful and bad-tempered as he always
did when he was especially wretched and unhappy.</p>

<p>Harvey Bronson glanced at him and thought,
“What a lemon to have around! He’d sour the milk
by looking at it!”</p>

<p>Presently, as often happened to Lester, a lovely
thing bloomed there, silent, unseen. Through the
crazy, rhythmless chatter of the typewriters in the
office, through the endless items on the endless bills,
he heard it coming, as from a great distance, on
radiant feet. It was only rhythm at first, divine,
ordered rhythm, putting to flight the senseless confusion
of what lay about him.</p>

<p>And then there glowed before him the glory of
the words, the breath-taking upward lift of the first
one, the sonorous cadences of the lines that followed,
the majestic march of the end.</p>


<p>“Soaring through wider zones that pricked his scars</p>
<p>With memory of the old revolt from awe,</p>
<p>He reached a middle height, and at the stars</p>
<p>Which are the brain of heaven, he looked, and sank.</p>
<p>Around the ancient track marched, rank on rank</p>
<p>The army of unalterable law.”</p>


<p>Lester Knapp’s heart swelled, shone bright, escaped
out of its misery, felt itself one with the greatness
of the whole.</p>

<p>The words kept singing themselves in his ear ...
“... he looked, and sank.” “... marched, rank
on rank.” “The army of unalterable law.”</p>

<p>The weighty, iron clang of the one-syllabled word
at the end gave him a sensation of an ultimate
strength somewhere. He leaned on that strength
and drew a long free breath.</p>

<p>His lean sallow face was lighted from within, and
shone. He leaned far over his desk to hide this.
He tried to think of something else, to put away
from him this unmerited beauty and greatness. A
man who is a failure in a business-office ought not
for an instant to forget his failure. The least he
can do is to be conscious of his humiliation at all
times.</p>

<p>But in spite of himself, his lips were curved in a
sweet, happy smile.</p>



<p>Harvey Bronson glanced at him and felt irritated
and aggrieved by his expression. “What call has a
dead loss like Lester Knapp got to be looking so doggone
satisfied with himself!” he thought.</p>





<h3>Chapter 5</h3>


<p>THAT afternoon when at half-past four he
stepped out on the street again, his long lean
face was quite without expression. But it was not
sallow. It was very white.</p>

<p>He walked straight before him for a step or two,
stopped short and stared fixedly into the nearest
show-window, one of Jim McCarthy’s achievements.</p>

<p>Mrs. Prouty happened to stand there too. She
was looking at a two-hundred-dollar fur coat as
tragically as though it were the Pearly Gates and
she sinking to Gehenna. She dreamed at night about
that fur coat. She wanted it so that she could think
of little else. Unlike Mrs. Merritt, she had no resources
of fine old Paisley shawls to fall back on.</p>

<p>She looked up now, saw who had come to a stop
beside her, and said, with the professional cordiality
of a rector’s wife, “Oh, how do you <i>do</i>, Mr.
Knapp,” and was not at all surprised when he did
not answer or notice that she was there. Lester
Knapp was notoriously absent-minded. It was one
of his queer trying ways. He had so many. Poor
Mrs. Knapp! But how brave she was about it. It
was splendid to see a woman so loyal to a husband
who deserved it so little. She looked sideways at
him, forgetting for an instant her heartache over
the coat. Mercy! What a sickly-looking man!
Bent shoulders, hollow chest, ashy-gray skin ...
no physique at all. And the father of a family!
Such men ought not to be allowed to have children.</p>

<p>The coat caught her eye again, with its basilisk
fascination. She sighed and stepped into the store
to ask to see it again, although she knew it was as
far out of her reach as a diamond tiara. To handle
its soft richness made her sick with desire, but she
couldn’t keep away from it when she was downtown.</p>

<p>Her moving away startled Lester from his horrified
gaze on nothingness, and he moved on with a
jerky, galvanized gait like a man walking for the
first time after a sickness.</p>

<p>He had lost his job. He had been fired. At the
end of the month there would be no money at all
to keep things going, not even the little they had
always had.</p>

<p>Was it the earth he was treading, solid earth?
It seemed to sway up and down under him till he
was giddy. He <i>was</i> giddy. He was going to faint
away. Oh, that would be the last disgrace. To
faint away on the street because he had lost his job.
The world began to whirl around before his eyes, to
turn black. He caught at a tree.</p>

<p>For an instant his eyes were blurred, his ears
rang loudly; and then with racking pains, consciousness
began to come back to him. He still stood
there, his arm still flung around the tree. He had
not fainted.</p>

<p>In the pause while he fought inwardly for strength
to go on, when every step seemed to plunge him
more deeply into the black pit of despair, he was
conscious of a steady voice, saying something in his
ear—or was it inside his head? The street was
quite empty. It must be in his head. How plainly
he heard it—another one of those tags of poetry
which haunted him....</p>


<p>“But make no sojourn in thy outgoing,</p>
<p>For haply it may be</p>
<p>That when thy feet return at evening</p>
<p>Death shall come in with thee.”</p>


<p>At once it was as though strong wine had been
held to his lips, as though he had drunk a great
draught of vigor. His eye cleared, his heart leaped
up, he started forward with a quick firm step.</p>


<p>“When thy feet return at evening</p>
<p>Death shall come in with thee.”</p>


<p>There was no need to despair. He was not helplessly
trapped. There was a way out. A glorious
way! The best way all around. The rightness of
it blazed on him from every point as he hurried
up the street. It meant for the children that at last
he would be able to give them money, real money,
just like any father. There would be not only the
ten thousand dollars from his insurance policy but
five thousand at least for the house and lot. He had
been offered that the other day. Actual cash. And
not only actual cash, but emancipation from the
blighting influence of a futile and despised father.</p>

<p>The children didn’t despise him yet, but they
would soon, of course. Everybody did. And Eva
never lost a chance to bring home to them with
silent bitterness the fact of their father’s utter worthlessness.
Not that he blamed her, poor ambitious
Eva, caught so young by the senses, and rewarded by
such a blank as he!</p>

<p>And what a glorious thing for Eva—freedom
from the dead weight of an unsuccessful husband
whom she had to pretend to put up with. An easier
life for Eva all around. She would sell the house—<i>Eva</i>
would probably get more than five thousand
dollars for it!—and with that and the insurance
money would move back to her parents’ big empty
village home in Brandville as the lonely old people
had so many times begged her to do. People lived
for next to nothing in those country towns; and as
a widow she could accept the proffered help from
her prosperous store-keeping father which her pride
had always made her refuse as a wife.</p>

<p>That’s what it would be for his family; and for
himself—Good God! an escape out of hell. Not
only had he long ago given up any hope of getting
out of life what he wanted for himself,—an opportunity
for growth of the only sort he felt himself
meant for, but he had long ago seen that he was
incapable of giving to Eva and the children anything
that anybody in the world would consider
worth having. The only thing he was supposed to
give them was money, and he couldn’t make that.</p>

<p>The words sang themselves in his head to a loud
triumphant chant:</p>


<p>“For haply it may be</p>
<p>That when thy feet return....”</p>


<p>He was brought up short by a sudden practical
obstacle, looming black and foreboding before his
impracticality, as life had always loomed before him.
How could he manage it? His insurance policy was
void in case of suicide, wasn’t it? He would have
to contrive somehow to make it look like an accident.
He was seared to the bone by the possibility
that he might not be able to accomplish even that
much against the shrewd business sense of the world
which had always defeated him in everything else.</p>

<p>At the idea he burst into strange, loud laughter,
the mad sound of which so startled even his own
ears that he stopped short, stricken silent, looking
apprehensively about him.</p>

<p>But there was nobody in sight, except far at the
end of the street, three small figures which seemed
to be running towards him and waving their arms.
He looked at them stupidly for a moment before he
recognized them. His own children! Oh, yes, of
course, this was Thursday afternoon, Ladies’ Guild
day, one of those precious Thursday hours that were
different from all the others in the week. The children
often got Stephen’s wraps on and brought him
out to meet their father, to “start visiting” that much
sooner.</p>

<p>They were nearer now, running, Stephen bouncing
between them, holding tightly to their hands.
They were all smiling at him with shining welcoming
eyes. He heard the sweet shrillness of their
twittering voices as they called to him.</p>

<p>The tears rushed to his eyes. They loved him.
By God, they loved him, his children did! Yes,
perhaps even Stephen a little. And he loved them!
He had for them a treasure-store of love beyond
imagination’s utmost reach! It was <i>hard</i> to leave
them.</p>

<p>But so the world willed it. A father who had
only love and no money—the sooner he was out of
the way the better. He had had that unquestioned
axiom ground into every bleeding fiber of his heart.</p>

<p>“Oh, Father, Stevie got on his own coat and buttoned
every....”</p>

<p>“<i>Yubbers</i> mineself too,” bragged Stephen breathlessly.</p>

<p>“Teacher says the first half of my play....”</p>

<p>They had come up to him now, clambering up and
down him, clawing lovingly at him, all talking at
once. What good times they had together Thursday
afternoons!</p>

<p>“Father, how does the ‘Walrus and the Carpenter’
go after ‘It seems a shame, the Walrus said’? Henry
and I told Stevie that far, but we can’t remember
any....”</p>

<p>Lester Knapp swung Stephen up to his shoulder
and took Henry and Helen by the hand.</p>

<p>“It seems a shame, the Walrus said,” he began
in the deep, mock-heroic voice they all adored,</p>


<p>“To play them such a trick</p>
<p>After we’ve brought them out so far</p>
<p>And made them trot so quick.”</p>


<p>“Oh, yes,” cried the older children. “Now we
know!” And as they swung along together, they
all intoned delightedly,</p>


<p>“The Carpenter said nothing <i>but</i></p>
<p>‘The butter’s spread too thick!’”</p>







<h3>Chapter 6</h3>


<p>MRS. ANDERSON never forgot a detail of
what happened that afternoon, and she soon
became letter-perfect in her often-repeated statement
of the essential facts. She told and retold
her story word for word like a recitation learned by
heart, without alteration; except as she allowed herself
from time to time to stress a little more heavily
her own importance as the only witness who had
seen everything, to insist yet more vehemently on
her absolute freedom from responsibility for the
catastrophe.</p>

<p>“It was icy that afternoon, you know how it had
thawed in the morning and then turned cold, and
I was real nervous about slipping. I’m not so
steady on my feet as I was fifty years ago and when
I saw Mrs. Knapp putting on her things to leave
the Guild meeting I said to her, ‘Mrs. Knapp,’ I
said, ‘won’t you let me go along with you and take
your arm over the icy places? I’m real nervous
about slipping,’ I said. And she said, ‘Yes, of
course,’ and we started out and I felt so relieved
to have her to hold to. She’s the kind you couldn’t
imagine slipping, you know, the kind you’d <i>want</i> to
take her arm over hard places. She’s a wonderful
woman, Mrs. Knapp is. I always said so even before
all this happened. There’s nothing she can’t
do. You ought to see the parlor furniture she recovered
with her own hands, as good as any upholsterer
you ever saw. And then didn’t her Henry
pester her to let him have a dog, and a <i>white</i> dog
at that! Of course she didn’t let him—you know
how a white dog’s hairs will show. When I was a
girl I remember my Aunt Esther had a white dog—but
I was telling you about how we first saw
the fire. We had just turned the corner by Wertheimer’s
and I was looking down to pick my way,
and Mrs. Knapp said, ‘Good gracious, Mrs. Anderson,
what’s that on your roof?’ I looked quick but
I couldn’t see anything, and she said, ‘It looks like
a—oh, yes, I see, a flame right by your chimney.’</p>

<p>“And then I knew it must be so, for that end
chimney of mine had had a crack in it for ever so
long, and I’d tried and <i>tried</i> to get a mason to come,
but you know how they hate a little tinkering repair
job, and anyhow for a <i>woman</i>! Well, Mrs. Knapp
she started on a run for her house to telephone the
fire department and I scuffled along as fast as I
could for fear of slipping. I wasn’t anywhere near
my front walk yet when Mr. Knapp came running
out from their house, bareheaded in all that cold
with a pail in each hand. He could see me coming
along slow and he hollered to me, ‘Where’s your
long ladder, Mrs. Anderson?’ And I hollered back,
‘It’s hung up under the eaves of the barn, but don’t
you go trying to climb up that steep icy roof, Mr.
Knapp! You’ll break your neck if you do!’ I said
to him just as I’m saying to you. I did my <i>best</i> to
keep him from it! I feel bad enough without that.
And I give you my word I hollered to him just as I
told you, ‘Don’t you go trying to climb up that steep
icy roof, Mr. Knapp. You’ll break your neck if
you do!’ I said.</p>

<p>“He didn’t say anything back so I don’t know
whether he heard me or not, though I hollered at
the top of my voice, I promise you. He ran around
through my back yard and I after him, only I had
to go slow on account of the ice, and before I turned
the corner of the house, I heard somebody yelling
my name back of me, ‘Mrs. Anderson! Come and
let us in quick! Your house is on fire!’ It was Mr.
Emmet and his two boys from across the street.
They had axes and they wanted me to let them in
and up attic because they thought they could get
at it from the inside. It seems they had a fire
once in their chimney that they—well, while I
was trying to get my latch-key in the keyhole—you
can just better believe that by that time I was
so mixed up I didn’t know which end my head was
on, and Mr. Emmet had to take the key away and
open the door himself—that was after the fire engine
drove up and you know what a terrible clatter
they always make, and I was wild about their getting
out their big hose because my sitting room ceiling
had just been replastered and I was afraid the water
would run down and spoil it, and by that time anyhow
I had something else to worry about, for all
creation was there, the way they do, you know,
run wherever the fire engine goes, more men and
boys than you ever <i>saw</i>! Awful tough-looking too,
lots of them, from those low-down tenement houses
near the tracks.... My, wasn’t I glad to see Mrs.
Knapp coming back! She’s a master hand for managing
things. She shooed all those hoodlums out
double-quick. They were crowding right in after
Mr. Emmet, bold as brass. I tell you there don’t
anybody stay long when <i>she</i> tells ’em to go. And
then she headed off the firemen from turning on their
hose till some of them had gone up attic to see how
the Emmets were getting along, and some others
had gone around back to see what Mr. Knapp was
up to. She ran upstairs with them to the attic, and
I went out on the porch and leaned around to see if
I could make out what they were doing back of the
house—and then—oh, then—I’ll never forget it to
my dying day! I saw a couple of firemen come
around from the back of the house carrying something.
I couldn’t see what it was, it was so dark,
but the way they carried it, the way they stepped—when
you’re as old as I am, and have seen as many
dead people ... you <i>know</i>!</p>

<p>“I screamed out at them, ‘Oh, oh, oh, what is it?
What has happened?’ But I knew before they said
a word. One of them said, ‘It’s Mr. Knapp. Don’t
let Mrs. Knapp know till we can get the body
over to the house!’ And the other one said, ‘He
must have fallen off the roof and broken his back.’”</p>





<h2>PART TWO</h2>

<h3>Chapter 7</h3>


<p>IT was after an almost continuous thirty-six-hour
session of work that Jerome Willing finally
stepped out of his office, walked down the dark aisles
between brown-linen-covered counters, nodded to the
night-watchman, and shut the front door behind him.
He crossed the street and turned to take a last affectionate
survey of the building which sheltered his
future. He was very tired, but as he looked at it
he smiled to himself, a candid young smile of pride
and satisfaction. It did not look to him like a four-storied
brick front, but like a great door opened to
the opportunity he had always longed for.</p>

<p>He stood gazing at it till a passer-by jostled him in
the dusk. “Well, well ...” he shook his head
with a long, satisfied sigh, “mustn’t stand mooning
here; must get home to Nell and the little girls.”</p>

<p>As he walked up the pleasant street, between the
double rows of well-kept front yards and comfortable
homes, he was thinking for the thousandth time
how lucky he was, lucky every way you looked at it.
For one thing lucky just this minute in having an
ex-business-woman for a wife. Nell would understand
his falling head over ears into work that first
day and a half of his return after an absence. She
never pulled any of that injured-wife stuff, no matter
how deep in business he got. Fact was, she was
as deep as he, and liked to see him get his teeth into
it. She surely was the real thing as a wife.</p>

<p>When he let himself into the front door of the
big old house, he heard the kids racketing around
upstairs cheerfully, with their dog, and was grateful,
as he and Nell so often were, for the ease and freedom
and wide margin of small-town life. It wasn’t
in a New York flat that the children could raise
merry hell like that, with nobody to object.</p>

<p>Through the open door he saw his wife’s straight,
slim, erect back. She was in the room they had set
apart for her “office,” and she was correcting a galley
of proof, the ads. for to-morrow’s papers.</p>

<p>“Hello there, Nell,” he cried cheerfully. “Got my
head above water at last. I’m home for a real visit
to-night.”</p>

<p>His wife laid down her fountain pen, turned
around in her chair and smiled at him.</p>

<p>“That’s good,” she said. “What’s the news?”
Although she saw that he looked haggard with
fatigue, she made no comment on it.</p>

<p>“The news is, Mrs. Willing,” he said, bending over
her for a kiss, “that I’ve got it just about all worked
out.”</p>

<p>“<i>Every</i>thing?” she said skeptically. “Even the
bonus for the—”</p>

<p>“Pretty much! The store is surely tuning up!
Give her a month to work the bearings in, and then
watch our dust!”</p>

<p>They looked at each other happily, as he sat down
in an armchair and leaned back with a long breath
almost of exhaustion.</p>

<p>“Just like a dream, isn’t it, all of it?” said Nell.</p>

<p>“You’ve said it! When I remember how I used
to hope that perhaps if we scrimped and saved we
might be able to buy a part interest somewhere, after
I’d put in the best years of my life working for
other men! Doesn’t it make you afraid the alarm-clock
will ring and wake you up any minute?”</p>

<p>“But did you really settle the bonus question for
the non-selling force?” asked Mrs. Willing, returning
relentlessly to the most difficult point.</p>

<p>“I worked it out by giving it up for the present,”
he answered promptly.</p>

<p>She laughed. “Well, that’s <i>one</i> way.”</p>

<p>“I tell you, I’ve given up trying to make it all fit
together like clockwork. Jobs in a store aren’t alike.
Salespersons are one thing, and you can find out
exactly what they’re worth in dollars and cents and
pay them what they <i>earn</i>. But when they don’t sell,
it’s different. What I’m going to do is to decide on
basic wages for all the employees who don’t sell—just
about enough to get along on. And then pull
the really good work out of them with a bonus—I’ll
call it a bonus. It’s really a sort of disguised
fine for poor work....”</p>

<p>“I wish you’d start at the beginning and get somewhere,”
said his wife rigorously. “If I put woolly
statements like that into my advertising copy....”</p>

<p>“Well, here’s the idea. Take the delivery crews
for example.—There’s only one of them now, of
course, but there are going to be more soon. I offer
them—oh, anything you like, twelve or fifteen dollars
a week. That much they’re sure of until they’re
fired, no matter how they do their work! ‘But if
you do your work perfectly,’ I tell ’em, ‘there’s ten
dollars a week more,’ or something like that—I
haven’t made up my mind about the details....
‘There’s ten dollars apiece for each of you if you get
through the week with a perfect record.’—No,
that doesn’t put emphasis enough on team spirit;
I’ll make it ten or fifteen for the crew to divide—that’ll
give them an incentive for jacking each other
up. We put the money in dimes and quarters in a
box with a glass cover where they can look at it.
Then every time they run without oil, or with a
dirty car, or lose a package, or let a friend ride with
them, out comes a dollar or a quarter or fifty cents,
depending on how serious the case may be. Don’t
you just bet when they see their bonus shrinking before
their eyes they’ll buck up and <i>try</i>? Of course I
couldn’t use such a raw line with the better class—the
accounting department, for instance, but something
with the same idea.—By the way, that reminds
me. I had to let Lester Knapp go—remember
him? That dyspeptic gloom, second desk on the
left as you go in.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Willing nodded. “I don’t know that I ever
noticed him, but I’ve heard about him through the
St. Peter’s women. I thought you said you could
manage.”</p>

<p>“I never really thought that. I knew I couldn’t
right along. But I tell you, Nell, the truth is I’m
soft when it comes to telling folks they can go. I
hate to do it! I kidded myself into thinking Knapp
might buck up. But it wouldn’t do. For one thing
Bronson can’t stand him and I’ve got to back up
my heads of departments. They’ve got to like their
help or they can’t get any work out of them.” He
sat forward in his chair and began playing with his
watch chain.</p>

<p>“How did Mr. Knapp take it?”</p>

<p>“Oh, very decently—too decently! It made it all
the harder. He admitted, when I asked him, that
his work didn’t interest him—that he hated it.
When I half-way offered to give him a try at the
selling end, he said he was sure he wouldn’t like it
any better,—was sure he wouldn’t do even so well
there. He said he knew he’d hate selling. Then
when I put it up to him whether he thought a man
can ever do good work if he doesn’t like his job, he
didn’t say a thing, just kept getting whiter and
whiter, and listened and listened. I did my best to
let him down easy. Thanks of the firm for long and
faithful service, take plenty of time to look for
something else, no hurry. But it was no go. He’s
got plenty of brains of a queer sort, enough to see
through that sort of talk. It was damned unpleasant.
He has a very uncomfortable personality anyhow.
Something about him that rubs you the wrong
way.” His voice was sharp with personal discomfort.
He looked exasperated and aggrieved.</p>

<p>Out of her experience of his world and her knowledge
of him, his wife’s sympathy was instant. “It
<i>is</i> hard on <i>you</i> having all those uncomfortable personal
relations!” she said. “It always seems unfair
that I can stay here at home with the children and
draw a salary for writing advertisements that I love
to do without sharing any of the dirty work.”</p>

<p>“It’s no joke,” he agreed rather somberly. He
looked at his watch. “Will I have time for a cigar
before dinner?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Just about. I didn’t know when you might be
in, so the children and I have had ours. I told Kate
to start broiling the steak when she heard you come
in, but she’s always slow.”</p>

<p>He clipped and lighted his cigar with an air of
immense comfort. Wasn’t it something <i>like</i> to come
back to such a home after working your head off,
and find everything so easy and smooth!</p>

<p>“I’ve often thought,” said his wife, “that letting
people go would be the hardest part of administrative
work for me.”</p>

<p>He drew his first puff from his cigar and relaxed
in his chair again. “Did I ever happen to tell you
about the first time I had to fire any one?” He had
told her several times but she gave no intimation of
this, listening with a bright eager attention as he
went on. “Way back when I’d only just pulled up
to being head of the hosiery department at Burnham
Brothers. She was a weak-kneed, incompetent, complaining
old maid who was giving the whole department
a black eye with the customers—ought to have
been cleared out long before. Well, at last I got my
nerve up to telling her to go, and she took it hard—made
a scene, cried, threatened to kill herself, said
her sick sister would starve. She was ninety per
cent hysteric when she finally flung out of my
office; and I was all in. So I beat it right up to
the chief’s office and sobbed out the whole talk on
old J. P. Burnham’s bosom.”</p>

<p>Nell smiled reminiscently. “Yes, how we all used
to lean on old J. P. when things went wrong. He
always made me think of a dog-tired old Atlas, holding
everything up on those stooped old shoulders of
his. What did he say?”</p>

<p>“Oh, he didn’t look surprised. I suppose I wasn’t
the first youngster to lose my nerve that way. He
limped over and shut the door as if he was going to
give me a long talk, but after all he didn’t say
much. Just a few pieces of advice with long pauses
to let them sink in. But I’ve never forgotten them.”</p>

<p>“No, you never did forget what he said,” agreed
Nell. She was very anxious to get on to another
matter of importance but she saw by her husband’s
manner that he was talking himself out of his discomfort,
so she gave him another chance to go on,
by remarking, “But I don’t see what <i>any</i>body can
say about dismissing employees that would help a
bit. It’s just horrid and that’s all there is to it.”</p>

<p>“Well, he sort of stiffened me up, anyhow. Reminded
me that running a store isn’t philanthropy,
that everybody from the boss down is there not to
make a living for himself but to get goods sold.
Made me see that for a department manager to keep
an incompetent salesperson is just as dishonest as
if he’d put his hand in the cash register. Worse,
because the firm can stand losing a little cash
enough sight better than having its customers
snapped at and slighted. But what made the biggest
impression on me was when he made me think
of the other girls in the department who <i>did</i> do
their work, how unfair it was to them to keep a
lame duck that shoos everybody away from the department
so they can’t make any sales. They don’t
come into the office and throw a fit, but they don’t
get a fair deal just the same. Besides incompetence
is as catching as measles.”</p>

<p>“That’s so.” Nell saw the point, thoughtfully.
“But it doesn’t make it any pleasanter when the one
you’re dismissing <i>is</i> throwing the fit.”</p>

<p>“You bet your life it does not,” agreed her husband,
drawing with satisfaction on his excellent
cigar, “and old J. P. didn’t put up any bluff about
it. He never said he enjoyed it. He said it was
just a part of the job, and you’ve got to stand up
to it if you’re going to grow up to carry a man’s
load. You’re there to do your best for the business.
He got another point over to me, a good
one—even for the lame ducks, it’s kinder to
throw ’em right out as soon as you’re sure they can’t
make good. Don’t let ’em stay on and gather mold
till they can’t make a good try at anything else.
That’s what made it so hard to tell Knapp he was
through. Uncle Charley ought to have told him
that, after he’d been a month in the store, twelve
years ago. It’s a crime to let a man stay on and
vegetate and get mildewed like that. It must have
been clear for anybody but a blind man to see,
after he’d been a month at his desk, that he’d never
be anything but a dead loss in the business-world,
what with his ill health, and his wool-gathering, and
his tags of poetry! Uncle Charley ought to have
pushed him off to be a dish-washer, or a college professor,
or one of those jobs that a man without any
jump in him can hold. It’s just a sample of the way
poor Uncle Charley let the business run downhill
ever since he knew he had that cancer. You can’t
blame him, in a manner of speaking. But the fact
is that the whole works from the stock-room to the
heating plant was just eaten up with dry rot.”</p>

<p>“I’m sorry about that Mr. Knapp though, personally,”
said his wife. “He has a wife and three
young children, you know.”</p>

<p>“The devil he has!” said Jerome annoyed. “Isn’t
that just like him? Well, I’ll try to look him up
to-morrow and see if I can’t suggest <i>some</i>thing else.
Or give him a check with the thanks of the firm.
That’d be the cheapest way out. I know right now
there’s no getting any decent work out of him.
Wherever I put him, he’d be like a bit of cotton
waste clogging up an oil-pipe.”</p>

<p>“How about the accounting department, anyhow?”
asked Nell. “Have you got it straightened
out?”</p>

<p>“Yes, now that Knapp has gone I guess it will
run all right. Thank heavens, there’s one department
in the department-store business that’s pretty
well standardized. That young expert accountant
McKenzie and Blair sent on has straightened out
the awful mess it was in. You can tell where you
stand now without closing down and taking a
month’s work to unravel the snarls. And I guess
Bronson is young enough to keep it running. I’ll
give him the chance anyway; he’s the livest wire on
that side of the business if he is an awful roughneck!
If he’ll come through, it’ll save time having to break
somebody else in.”</p>

<p>“I rather think Mr. McCarthy may be good
enough, too,” said Mrs. Willing. “Since you spoke
about him, I’ve been watching his window displays.
Of course they’re crude and he’s a bit old. But
he has temperament and if you took him with you
a time or two on buying trips to New York to let
him look at the real thing and bought him a good
modern manual on window-dressing—poor thing!
I don’t suppose he dreams there are books on his
subject....”</p>

<p>Her husband grunted. “Yes, there’s stuff in him.
He’s pretty red-headed and touchy, but there never
was a good window-dresser yet that wasn’t as prickly
and unreasonable as a teething baby. We’d have
to put up with that from any one who had the
temperament to do the work the way it ought to
be done. But that’s about <i>all</i> the temperament I can
stand. Thank the Lord, I won’t have to put up
with a professional buyer. The more I think of it
the more I’m sure I want to keep the buying in my
own hands, every bit of it—unless <i>you</i> want to come
along sometimes, of course. But no highly paid expert
buyers in mine! You know them as well as I
do. Did you ever see one that wasn’t domineering
and stuck on himself and dead sure he never made
a mistake in his life?”</p>

<p>“<i>Never!</i>” Nell burned with a resentment of as
long a date and as hot as her husband’s. “<i>Never!</i>
What always made me the tiredest about them was
the way they blamed everything on the selling force
or the advertising office. If the goods didn’t move,
was it ever <i>their</i> fault? Not once in a million times.
It was because the salespeople couldn’t sell or the
ad.-writers couldn’t write.”</p>

<p>“And yet look at the times they get suckered into
buying a carload of what everybody knew was
lemons, only we mustn’t let on, for fear of hurting
their sacred temperamental feelings! No, by
George, none of that in mine! I feel like sending
up a Hallelujah when I think I’ll never have to
baby one of them again and smooth him down and
calm his nerves. I’ve had the experience and training
to handle that whole thing for myself. And
I’m going to do it!”</p>

<p>A gong boomed pleasantly behind him. “Dinner,”
said Nell, getting up from her desk.</p>

<p>He threw away what was left of his cigar and
went into the comfortable dining-room, his appetite
whetted by the odor of steak, onions and fried potatoes.</p>

<p>“I bought a case of that near-beer Wertheimer’s
has,” said his wife, uncorking and pouring out a
foaming brown glassful. “I can’t see that it’s not
just as good as it ever was.”</p>

<p>“Yes, tastes pretty good to me to-night, that’s
sure,” said Jerome, taking a long drink and smiling
as he cut into the thick steak. His wife let him
alone while he took the sharpest edge off his appetite.
She herself had often come in after working
overtime in an office! But as he started in on a
second round of everything, she said, “It’ll be a
surprise for the old store, won’t it, to have somebody
really <i>buying</i> for it after the junk that’s been
loaded onto its shelves?”</p>

<p>“Uncle Charley,” pronounced Jerome, “never got
beyond the A. T. Stewart 1872 notion of stocking
up four times a year with ‘standard goods.’” They
both laughed at the old phrase.</p>

<p>“Standard goods!” said Nell. “How funny it
sounds! When you can’t sell a button the year
after it’s made nowadays!”</p>

<p>“I just <i>hope</i>,” said Jerome, “I just hope to the
Lord that some of that gang of crooks who used to
sell Uncle Charley try to work the same game on
me just once! Where in the world did they <i>get</i> the
out-of-the-ark junk they used to work off on him?
Must have had it stored in a barn somewhere!”</p>

<p>His wife thought silently that now, after he had
eaten and was beginning on his pie, with a second
cigar in prospect, perhaps she might get to the question
she had really wanted to ask all along. “Did
you see that young Crawford at Jordan Marsh’s?”
she asked.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Jerome.</p>

<p>And Nell knew that for some reason it was all off.
“Won’t he do?” she said in disappointment. “You
<i>do</i> need a store superintendent so awfully if you’re
going to be away on buying trips.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s better to wait and get the right person
than rush in and take somebody who’d gum the
whole works. Oh, nothing wrong with Crawford.
He’s a comer. But the more I talked with him the
surer I was that he wouldn’t fit. Nobody like him
would fit into the organization the way we want it.
That corking slogan of yours says it all—‘The
Homelike Store.’ Well, no smooth, big-city proposition
like Crawford could be homelike, not in a
thousand years. He wouldn’t want to be. He
wouldn’t see the point. He’d be too smart for the
town. He wouldn’t go to church. He’d play golf
on Sundays. He wouldn’t belong to any of the
societies or clubs. He’d drive a snappy runabout
and beat it off to the city. The long and the short
of it is that he’d be bored by the town and show it.”</p>

<p>Nell saw all that. She nodded her head. She
tried to imagine him at a church supper in the basement
of the First Congo Church—and gave it up.</p>

<p>“Worse than that, it came to me,” said Jerome,
“that any man with pep enough for the job would
have too much pep. He’d want to look forward to
being taken into the business. And I don’t want
any partner but you. This is <i>our</i> store! But leave
that alone. He wouldn’t know how to handle the
girls. He’d be used to flip, knowing, East-side tenement-house
kids. How would he get along with our
small-town American high-school graduates who’re
as good as anybody and know it? He might try to
get gay with them—you haven’t forgotten Ritchie at
Burnham’s? None of that for <i>our</i> store. We’ve got
little girls of our own—and besides in a little place
like this scandal gets round so quick and people take
it so personally.”</p>

<p>“But you’ve got to have somebody. There are
some pretty keen business women,” suggested his
wife. “Why not try one of them—they give more
value for the same salary. They stick to their work
and don’t make trouble. Mostly they have tact
enough not to antagonize the customers. Don’t you
think the business could afford one of the really
good ones?”</p>

<p>“It can afford pretty much any salary for the right
party. Nothing’s too good for our store, Nell! Yes,
I’d rather have a woman any day. I’ve thought
about one or two of the best I know. They’re good,
good as the best—wear the right sort of quiet
clothes, don’t make a noise, always on the job, and
they’d never make a row about not being taken into
the firm. Yes, I like the idea of a woman for
store manager—but—well—none of the ones I can
think of are exactly right. They don’t quite
stand for the idea I’ve got for the business, don’t
make the personal friendly appeal. You know how
they are—quiet enough and efficient enough, but
they’ve got the big-town label plastered all over
them, with their smart clothes and their permanent
waves and their voices going up and down the
scale. Half our customers would be afraid of them.
And you hate people you are afraid of. I suppose
a woman like that would <i>do</i>, but I’d rather wait a
while to see if better material doesn’t come along. I
want somebody the customers would think of as one
of <i>themselves</i>.”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course that would be better,” acquiesced
Nell. “But you have to take what you can get. Are
you sure there’s nobody in the store?”</p>

<p>“I’ve been over the selling force with a fine-toothed
comb. There’s nobody there who can go
higher than floor manager. Miss Flynn, the head of
the Cloak-and-Suits, is the nearest. She’s a wise
old bird, with lots of experience. But she plays
favorites with her girls, picks on certain ones for no
special reason and protects others, no matter what
they do. That’s the Irish of it. More temperament!”</p>

<p>“I suppose, anyhow, it’s always better policy to
get an outsider. It means less friction. But it does
seem as though we ought to be able to find some one
in this town, some one who’s respected and liked by
the people here.”</p>

<p>“If we could, she’d draw all the women into the
store after her, as though they were her sisters and
her cousins, especially if it was somebody known
as a good buyer already. There are always some
such in any community. We’d want a woman old
enough to take care of herself but young enough
to have all her physical stamina left, a nice woman,
a first-rater, who could learn and grow into the job.
Isn’t it exasperating how, when you have a grand
opening like that for just the right person, you can’t
lay your hand on her!”</p>

<p>“I could do it myself,” said Nell, “even although
all my training has been in the ad. department. I
know I could.”</p>

<p>“You could walk away with it, Nell. But we
need you for the advertising, and besides that job
would take you away from home all the time. And
of course somebody has to be here for the children.”</p>

<p>“No, I’d never consent to leave the children,” said
Nell. “I didn’t really mean it. I was just thinking
what fun it would be if there were two of me.”</p>

<p>“I wish there were!” said her husband, fervently.</p>

<p>“On second thought, I’m not at all sure <i>I</i> do!”
she said, laughing.</p>

<p>They went back now into the living-room and sank
down in armchairs, Nell with a cigarette. She had
looked first to be sure that the curtains were down
so that she was not visible from the street. “No,”
said Jerome, “we’d better not consider either of us
taking it. It would be a waste not to stick to the
lines we’ve been trained for. I suppose it’s just a
pipe dream to think I can find exactly the right
person. But you can bet your last cent I won’t tie
up for any long contract to anybody who isn’t
exactly the right person. I’ve got a hunch that some
day the right one will walk into the store and let
me lasso her. And I’ve faith enough in my hunch to
believe I’ll know her when I see her, and....”</p>

<p>“Isn’t that the ’phone?” asked his wife, suspending
her cigarette in mid-air.</p>

<p>“Oh, Lord! I hope not, just when we’re settled
for the evening!” cried her husband.</p>

<p>“I’ll answer it,” she said, going out into the hall.</p>

<p>When she came back she looked grave. “Oh,
Jerome, what do you think? That Mr. Knapp has
just had a terrible accident, they say. Fell off a
roof and killed himself.”</p>

<p>Jerome’s impulse was to cry out blamingly, “Isn’t
that just like him! Why couldn’t he choose some
other time!” But he repressed this decently. “Well,
what do you think we ought to do?” he asked Nell.</p>

<p>He was frightfully tired. The idea of stirring out
of his chair appalled him. But he wanted to establish
a tradition in the town that the store looked
after its employees like a father.</p>

<p>She hesitated. “Let me run upstairs and start
the children to bed. I believe we’d better go around
to their house and offer to do anything we can to
help out.”</p>




<h3>Chapter 8</h3>


<p>AS they stepped quickly along in the dark, they
tried to piece together the chronology of the
late afternoon for Knapp and decided that this
tragic ending to his feeble life must have come even
before he could have seen his wife to tell her of
his dismissal from the store. “I’m so glad of <i>that</i>!”
said Nell Willing, softly. “Now she need never
know.”</p>

<p>Her husband gave a hearty inward assent. It
was the devil anyhow to be so intimately concerned
in other people’s lives as an employer was.</p>

<p>They found the little house alight from top to
bottom, and full of people, whispering, moving about
restlessly and foolishly, starting and turning their
heads at any noise from upstairs. An old woman,
who said she was the Knapps’ next-door neighbor
and most intimate friend, stopped crying long
enough to tell them in a loud whisper that the
doctor said Mr. Knapp was still alive, but unconscious,
and dying from an injury to the spine. The
children, she said, had been taken away by a sort
of relative, Mrs. Mattie Farnham, who would keep
them till the funeral. Asked about Mrs. Knapp,
she replied that Mrs. Knapp was with the doctor
and her dying husband and was, as always, a marvel
of self-possession and calm. “As long as there’s
anything to do, Mrs. Knapp will be right there to
do it,” she said. “She’s a wonderful woman, Mrs.
Knapp is.”</p>

<p>The Willings sat for a time, awkwardly waiting,
with the other people awkwardly waiting, and then
went away, leaving behind them a card on which
Jerome had penciled the request to be allowed to be
useful in any way possible “to the family of a highly
respected member of the Emporium staff.”</p>

<p>As they walked home through the darkness, they
exchanged impressions. “That old neighbor’s head
is just like a snake’s, didn’t you think?” said
Jerome.</p>

<p>“She seemed very sympathetic, I thought,” said
Nell extenuatingly.</p>

<p>“She did seem to think a lot of Mrs. Knapp,”
admitted Jerome.</p>

<p>“All the women in St. Peter’s do,” said Nell.
“Mrs. Prouty says she doesn’t know what they would
do in parish work if it weren’t for Mrs. Knapp.
She’s one of the <i>workers</i>, you know. And a good
headpiece too.”</p>

<p>“I imagine she’s had to develop those qualities or
starve to death,” conjectured Jerome, forgetting for
an instant that the man he was criticizing lay at the
point of death.</p>

<p>The memory of this kept them silent for a moment
and then Nell asked, “Did you notice that
living-room?”</p>

<p>“You bet your life I did,” said her husband with
a lively professional interest. “The only living-room
I’ve seen in this town that had any style to it. Did
you see that sofa? And those curtains?”</p>

<p>“They say she’s a wonderful housekeeper. The
kind who stays right at home and sticks to her job.
You never see her out except at church.”</p>

<p>“No, I don’t believe I’ve ever laid eyes on her,”
said Jerome.</p>

<p>“And people are always talking about how beautifully
her children are brought up. With real manners,
you know. And such perfect ways at table.
How <i>do</i> you suppose she does it?”</p>

<p>“What <i>did</i> she ever see in Knapp?” Jerome cast
out the age-old question with the invariable, ever-fresh
accent of amazement which belongs with it.</p>

<p>“Oh, they married very young,” said thirty-year-old
Mrs. Willing wisely. “I believe he hadn’t finished
his course at the State University. He was
specializing in English literature.”</p>

<p>“He <i>would</i>!” ejaculated Jerome, pregnantly.</p>

<p>His wife laughed. And then they both remembered
again that the man was dying.</p>

<p>When they heard through Dr. Merritt that poor
Lester Knapp would not die but would be a bed-ridden
invalid, a dead-weight on his wife, the Willings
along with everybody else in town were aghast
at the fatal way in which bad luck seems to heap
up on certain unfortunate beings.</p>

<p>“That poor wife of his! What has she ever done
to deserve such a tragic life!” cried young Mrs.
Willing pityingly.</p>

<p>“For the Lord’s sake, what’s going to keep them
from being dependent on public charity?” thought
Jerome, apprehensively.</p>

<p>He sent up to the house with a tactfully worded
letter a check for a hundred dollars, saying he
thought the store was under a real obligation to its
faithful employee of long standing. “But,” he
thought, “you can’t keep that sort of help up forever.”</p>

<p>“I needn’t have worried!” he told himself the next
morning, when he found his check returned with a
short, well-written expression of thanks, but of unwillingness
to accept help which could only be temporary.
“We shall have to manage, somehow, sooner
or later,” the letter ran. It was signed Evangeline
Knapp. “What a fool name, Evangeline!” thought
the young merchant, somewhat nettled by the episode.</p>

<p>After this he was away on a buying expedition
that lasted longer than he intended, and when he
came home they had a set-to with leaking steam-pipes
in the store. He thought nothing more of the
Knapps till, meeting Dr. Merritt on the street, he
remembered to ask for news. Knapp was better
now, he heard, suffering less atrociously, with periods
of several hours of relative quiet. There had been
no actual fracture of the spinal bones, but the spinal
cord seemed affected, probably serious effusion of
blood within the spinal canal, with terrible nervous
shock.</p>

<p>How doctors do run on about their cases if you
get them started! Mr. Willing cut short any more
of this sort of medical lingo by asking to be told in
plain terms if the man would ever walk again.</p>

<p>“Probably not,” said Dr. Merritt, “though he will
reach the wheel-chair stage and perhaps even
crutches. Still, you never can be sure.... But he
is not a robust man, you know. I told you about
his obstinate dyspepsia. I never saw a worse case.”</p>

<p>Mr. Willing’s healthy satisfied face expressed the
silent disgust of a strong, successful man for a weak
and unsuccessful one. “What in hell are they going
to <i>do</i>?” he inquired. He added, blamingly,
“Three children! Lord!”</p>

<p>Dr. Merritt found nothing to answer and went
on, looking grave. He had helped all three children
into the world, had worn himself out over the two
older ones in their constantly recurring maladies,
and felt for them the tenderness and affection we
have for those who have given us much anxiety.</p>



<p>Jerome Willing was sitting at his office-desk, but
he was not working. He was dreaming. Into the
quiet of his office filtered a hum of activity exquisite
to his ears, the clicking of billing-machines,
the whirr of parcel-carriers, the sound of customers’
voices, buying merchandise. Out there the store
was smoothly functioning, supplying modern civilization
to ten thousand men and women. And it
was <i>his</i> store! Not only did he reap the profit—that
was a small part of his pleasure. It was his personality
which gave all those people the opportunity
to satisfy their needs, that was educating them to
desire better things. He called that a pretty fine way
of doing your share in raising the American standard
of living. It was a whale of a job to get it into
shape, too. What a mess the business had got into
during the stagnant passivity of the last ten years
of poor Uncle Charley’s life. It was a wonder that
so much as four walls and a roof were left.</p>

<p>Well, that just showed what an unheard-of favorable
position it had, the old store. It hung on and
kept alive like a rugged old lilac bush that you’d
tried to cut down. What wouldn’t it do, now that
it had somebody to water it and enrich it—somebody
who cared more about it than about anything
else in the world? And somebody who had the right
training, the right experience and information to do
the job. That was what had struck him most forcibly
during the last six months, when he had been
walking round and round his new work, getting
ready to take hold of it. He saw that there was
wonderful opportunity not only for him, but just as
wonderful for the store. And to take advantage of
it every scrap of his knowledge of business would
come in, all that he had picked up at trade conventions,
what he’d learned out of books on administration,
above all, every hour of experience. Yes,
every one, from his first bewildered week as a salesman
to the later years of the intoxicating battle of
personalities in the Market, when on his weekly
buying trips to New York, he had gone the round
of the wholesalers, comparing values, noting styles,
making shrewdly hidden calculations, keeping an inscrutable
face before exquisite things that made him
cry out inwardly with admiration, misleading buyers
from other stores, keeping his own counsel, feeling
his wits moving swiftly about inside his skull with
the smooth, powerful purr of a high-class motor.
If he could do all that just to be in the game, just
to measure up to other buyers, what couldn’t he do
now!</p>

<p>What a half-year he had had! What a wonderful
time he and Nell had put in together in this period
of waiting and preparation. No matter how fine
the realization might be, he was old enough to know
that nothing could ever be for them like this period
of creative planning when, moving around his problem,
he had studied it, concentrated on it and felt
that he had the solution in his own brain and personality.
It fitted him! It was his work! It was
like something in a book, like a missionary going out
into the field, like a prophet looking beyond the veil
of the present. Yes, that was what it was—he
looked through to the future, right past what was
there, the little halting one-horse affair, with its
meager force of employees, so many of them superannuated,
others of good stuff, but in the wrong
places, all of them untrained and uninformed, dull,
listless, bored, without a notion of what a fascinating
job they had. He had looked through them and
had seen the store he meant to have by the time he
was forty-five; for he knew enough to look far
ahead, to take his time, to build slowly and surely.
There it stood, almost as plain to his eye as the poor
thing that now took its place. He saw a big, shining-windowed
building, the best in all that part of the
state, with eighty or a hundred employees, trained,
alert, on their toes, sure of their jobs, earning big
money, developing themselves, full of personality
and zip, as people can be only when they are in
work they’re meant for and have been trained for.</p>

<p>It would never be what a man from the city would
call a <i>big</i> business. He never wanted it so big that
he couldn’t keep his hand on it all. It would be <i>his</i>
business, rather than a big one. But at that, he
saw now, especially with Nell getting a salary for
doing the advertising, it would bring them in more
income than anybody else in town dreamed of having.
They could live as they pleased as far as
spending went. Not that that was the important
part,—but still a very agreeable one.</p>

<p>He was sure of all this, sure! By God, he couldn’t
fail! The cards were stacked for him. A prosperous
town, just the right size; good-will and a
monopoly of trade that ran back for forty years;
no big city within fifty miles—why, even the
trains providentially ran at hours that were inconvenient
for people who wished to go to the city to
shop. And no rivals worth mentioning; nobody he
couldn’t put out of business inside ten years. He
thought again, as he had so many times, how miraculous
it was that in the ten years since Uncle Charley
had lost his grip, no Jew merchant had cut in to
snatch the rich heart out of the situation. Nobody
could do that now. He had the jump on the world.</p>

<p>With half-shut eyes he let himself bask for a
few minutes in this glorious vision; then, picking up
his hat and overcoat he left the office and, alert to
every impression behind his pleasant mask of affability,
moved down between household linens and
silk goods to the front door and stepped out into
the street. He had seen out of the tail of his eye
how that Boardman girl was making a mess of showing
lining silks to a customer, and made a mental
note to call in Miss Atkinson, the floor superintendent,
and tell her to give the girl a lesson or two on
draping silks as you showed them and making
sure that the price-tag was where the customer could
get the price without having to ask for it.</p>

<p>He was really on his way to the bank, but as he
stood in the front door, he saw that McCarthy was
dressing a window for the sporting-goods department
and decided to go across the street to look
at it. Jerome was convinced that window-dressers
never back far enough off from their work, never
get the total effect. Like everybody else they lose
themselves in details. He stepped across to the opposite
side of the street and stood there, mingling
with the other passers-by.</p>

<p>As he looked back towards the store, he noticed a
tall woman coming rapidly down the street. His
eye was taken at once by the quality of her gait.
He sometimes thought that he judged people more
by the way they walked than by any other standard.
He always managed to get a would-be employee
to walk across the room before taking her
on. This tall, dark-haired woman in the well-made
dark coat had just the sort of step he liked to see,
vigorous and swift, and yet unhurried. He wondered
who she was.</p>

<p>He saw her slow her pace as she approached the
store and stand for a moment looking in at
McCarthy fussing with his baseball bats and bicycle-lamps.
She really looked at him, too, as few
people ever look at anything, as if she were thinking
about what she was looking at, and not about
something in her own head. He had a good view of
her face now, a big-featured, plain face that looked
as though she might be bad-tempered but had plenty
of motive-power. She was perhaps forty years old.
He wondered what she was thinking about McCarthy.</p>

<p>She turned into the store now. Oh, she was a
customer. Well, she was one they wanted to give
satisfaction to. He stepped back across the street
and into the store to make sure that the salesperson
to whom she addressed herself was attentive.
But she was nowhere to be seen. Perhaps she had
gone directly upstairs.</p>

<p>He went along the aisle, casting as he went that
instinctively attentive look of his on the notions
and ribbons, and up the stairs to the mezzanine
floor where his office was. He meant to leave his hat
and coat there and go on in search of the new customer.
He heard a woman’s voice inside the accounting-room
saying, “Will you tell me, please,
where Mr. Willing’s office is.”</p>

<p>He knew in a moment, without seeing her, that the
voice belonged to the woman he had seen. That
was the kind of voice she <i>would</i> have.</p>

<p>“This is Mr. Willing,” he said, coming into the
accounting-room behind her. “Won’t you come with
me?”</p>

<p>Arrived in his office, she took the chair to which
he motioned her and said at once, in a voice which
he divined to be more tense than usual, “This is
Mrs. Lester Knapp, Mr. Willing. You said, you
remember.... You wrote on a card that you would
do something to help us. I thought perhaps you
could let me try to fill my husband’s place. We
need the money very much. I would do my best
to learn.”</p>

<p>Mr. Willing had the sure prescience of a man
whose antennæ are always sensitive to what concerns
his own affairs. He had an intuition that something
important was happening and drew himself
hastily together to get the best out of it for the
business. First of all, to make talk and have a
chance to observe her, he expressed his generous
sympathy and asked in detail about poor Knapp.
He assured her that he was more than willing to
help her in any way to reconstruct their home-life
and said he was in no doubt whatever that they
could find a place for her in the business, though
not in Mr. Knapp’s old place. “That office is entirely
reorganized and there are no vacancies. But
in the sales department, Mrs. Knapp. There are
always opportunities there. And for any one with
a knack for the work, much better pay. Of course,
like all beginners, you would have to begin at the
bottom and learn the business.”</p>

<p>She answered in a trembling voice, with an eagerness
he found pitiful, that she was quite willing to
start anyhow, do anything, for a chance to earn.</p>

<p>He guessed that she had been horribly afraid of
him, had heard perhaps from her husband that he
was hard and cold, had dreaded the interview, and
was now shaken by the extremity of her relief. He
liked the gallant way she had swung straight into
what she had feared.</p>

<p>To give her time to recover her self-control, he
turned away from her and fumbled for a moment
in his drawer to get out an employment blank, and
then, as he held it in his hand and looked at its
complicated questions, he realized that it was another
of the big-city devices that did not hit his
present situation. It would be foolish to give it to
this woman, with its big-city rigmarole of inquiry,—“Give
the last three places you worked; the address
in full of last three employers; what was your
position; reason for leaving,” etc., etc. He put it
back in the drawer and instead asked the question
to which he already knew the answer, “You have,
I suppose, had no experience at all in business?”</p>

<p>But after all, he did not know the answer, it
seemed, for she said, “Oh, yes, before I was married.
My father keeps the biggest store in Brandville,
up in the northern part of the state. It’s only a
general store of course. Brandville is a small place.
But I used to help him always. I liked it. And
Father always made a good thing out of the business.”</p>

<p>Jerome was delighted, “Why, that’s the best sort
of training,” he told her. “I always maintain that
country-store methods are the ideal: where you
know every customer personally, and all about their
tastes and needs and pocketbooks. Did you really
work there? Sell goods?”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed. From the time I was a little girl—after
school in the afternoons and in vacation time.
Father had a special little step-ladder made for me
so that I could carry it around and climb up to the
shelves. I am the only child, you know. Father
was proud that I liked to work with him.”</p>

<p>The vivid expression of her face as she told him
of this childhood memory made Jerome Willing
wonder that he could have thought she looked bad
tempered. She looked like a live wire, that was all.
And they never, in the nature of things, looked like
feather beds.</p>

<p>“Well ...” he said, to give himself time to
think. “Well....” He pulled an official-looking
loose-leafed book over to him and began looking
through it as though its contents had some connection
with placing the applicant before him. But as
a matter of fact the book contained nothing but
some of his old reports from the Burnham days.
He was turning over in his mind the best way to
handle the situation. Should he put her in a slow-moving
department like furniture or jewelry till she
got used to things? That was the safe, conservative
way. But he didn’t believe in the safe and conservative
if a chance to move faster looked good.
And at that it wouldn’t be much of a chance. If
she didn’t pan out, he could move her back into
the table linen, and no harm done.</p>

<p>He looked at her keenly to see the effect of his
announcement. “I believe the thing for you,” he
said, “is the Ladies’ Cloak-and-Suit department. I
can put you right in as stock-girl till you get the
hang of things. I always think stock-girl work is
the finest sort of training for salesmanship.”</p>

<p>He saw by her expression that she did not know
what a stock-girl was, that she did not realize what
a privilege it was to be put at once in the coveted
Cloak-and-Suits. But she rose at once. He liked
the way she stood up, with one thrust of her powerful
body. That was the way he liked to have salespeople
get up, alertly, when a customer came in. It
expressed willingness to serve and strength to give
good service. The sale was half made, right there,
he told his salespeople.</p>

<p>“I could go to work to-day,” she said. “I didn’t
know ... I hoped ... perhaps. I put on a black
dress to be ready in case you might have....”</p>

<p>By George! She was ready to step right into it
this minute. She slipped off her well-cut cloak
and showed a severe black serge dress.</p>

<p>“Why, yes, if you like,” he said negligently. She
took off her hat showing magnificent dark hair,
streaked with gray.</p>

<p>He said casually, as if making talk, “I happened
to see you watching our window-dresser at work as
you came in. What was your impression of what
he was doing?”</p>

<p>She said seriously, reflectively, “Well, Mr. McCarthy
always seems to me to put too many things
in his windows. I’ve thought a good many times
that if he chose his things with more care and had
fewer it might catch the eye better.”</p>

<p>“Well, Great Scott!” said Mr. Willing to himself
in extreme surprise. Aloud he said impassively, “We
haven’t talked wages yet. Stock-girls only get ten
dollars a week to begin with, you know.”</p>

<p>“That is a great deal better than nothing,” she
said firmly. “We have a few savings that will keep
us going till I can get a start. And perhaps I may
learn the business fairly quickly.”</p>

<p>“You bet your life you will,” said the proprietor
of the store inaudibly. Aloud he said, “The cloakroom
for salespeople is at the other end of the
second floor. If you’ll put your things there and
come back here, I’ll take you to your department
and introduce you to Miss Flynn.”</p>



<p>When Jerome Willing came back to his office
he stood for a while motionless, frowning down at
his desk. “Yes, of course it was preposterous,” he
told himself. He’d known her less than half an
hour—all the same he’d backed those crazy
hunches of his before—it had paid him to play
his hunches! And if something like that <i>did</i> pan
out ... he fell once more into a reverie. She
was just the kind of woman he was looking for,
mature, with a local following, somebody the women
of the town trusted. He could hear their voices
plain, “Ask Mrs. Knapp to step here a minute,
won’t you please? She has such good taste, I’d trust
her judgment....” And she’d be tied up so tight
with a sick husband and family of children there’d
be no chance of some one snatching her away and
marrying her just after he’d taught her the job.
It would be <i>fun</i> to teach somebody who wanted to
learn. Creative work—it always came back to
that if you were going to do anything first-rate.
You took raw material and shaped it with your own
intelligence. If only she might be the raw material!
If she turned out to have only a little
capacity to study and get information out of books
as well as the character and personality he was
pretty sure she had. Wilder dreams had come true.
His thoughts ran on again to the future of the store
... with a competent manager keeping the wheels
and cogs running smoothly ... with him to do the
buying ... small lots at a time ... every fortnight
... quick sales ... rapid turnovers that
made low profits possible. With Nell handling the
advertising campaign as only an intelligent college
woman could, with just the right adaptation of those
smart modern methods of hers to this particular
small town they were serving. She was a first-rater,
Nell was! It always had been fun to work with
her even before they were married! And what a
lark to work with her now! Good thing for Nell
too! It had been asking a great deal of a real,
sure-enough business-woman like Nell to give it all
up for <i>Kinder</i>, <i>Küche</i>, and <i>Kirche</i>. Nell had been
willing, had been happy, had loved having the
babies, had made them all happy. But now the
children were both going to school it stood to reason
she’d find time hang heavy on her hands, whip-stitch
that she was! And life in a small town was
Hades if you didn’t have lots of work to do in spite
of the big lawns and comfortable roomy homes. As
far as that went, life anywhere was Hades if you
didn’t have a job your size. You could see Nell
had thought of all that (though she had been too
good a sport to speak of it) by the way she had
grabbed at this chance to get back into the old
work, the work she’d loved so, and done so well at
Burnham’s. Now if this Mrs. Knapp would only
come through!</p>

<p>He brought himself up short again.... What a
kid he was to let his imagination reel it off like this—but
a minute later he was thinking how he and
Nell would enjoy giving an apt pupil steers, showing
her how to use a microscope in fabric tests, how
to know the right points of a well-made garment,
how to handle her girls as she got along to executive
work.... Oh, well, probably it was only a
pipe dream—and he knew enough to keep it to himself.</p>

<p>The clock in the National Bank opposite began
striking. Jerome glanced at it and saw with astonishment
that the hands pointed to twelve o’clock.
Time to go home to lunch. As he got his hat and
coat, he was wondering whether he had wasted a
forenoon or whether perhaps on the contrary....</p>





<h3>Chapter 9</h3>


<p>MRS. WILLING was as much interested as her
husband in the arrival of Mrs. Knapp in the
store. When he had finished telling her about the
interview and they had laughed and wondered over
the acuteness of the novice’s criticism of McCarthy’s
window-dressing, Nell said reflectively: “Do you
know, from all I’ve heard about her from the St.
Peter’s women—I wouldn’t be a bit surprised....”</p>

<p>Jerome recognized the idea to which his wife’s
imagination, like his own, had leaped, but he did
not think it at all necessary to let Nell know that
the same possibility had occurred to him.</p>

<p>He shook his head disapprovingly. “No, nothing
doing,” he said. “Anybody that’s got so much pep
to begin with, they’re always hard to handle. Want
to boss everything.”</p>

<p>He was pleased to have his wife point out what
had already occurred to him, the strangle-hold which
their relative economic situations gave them over
Mrs. Knapp. “I don’t believe she’d ever be hard
to handle or want more than you wanted to give
her—with all those reasons at home for holding
onto a job,” said Nell. She had as good a business
head as Jerome, however, felt as well as he
how visionary it was to build even the slightest
hopes on so slight a foundation, and now contributed
her own share of cold water to the prudent lowering
of their expectations. “But a woman with no
experience of business! Women who have spent
fifteen or twenty years housekeeping are no good for
anything else.”</p>

<p>“I forgot to tell you,” said Jerome, “that she had
worked some before she was married. Her father
keeps the store in Brandville. I looked him up.
Very good rating. She may get some of her ability
from him. Those country-store men sometimes acquire
a real business hunch. But see here, how can
her family manage if she’s away all day? I didn’t
feel like asking her. But I wondered if she could
be depended on. There’s nothing more of a bother
in a store than somebody who is always having to
miss a day.”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Prouty was telling me how she’s got everything
organized there. They are all saying it’s just
like her. Mr. Knapp is fairly comfortable now and
can read, and sit up in bed, and doesn’t need constant
care. There’s nothing anybody can <i>do</i> for
him, now, poor thing! The two older children are
big enough to take care of themselves and dress their
little brother and help around the house. It seems
that several of the people at the store are being very
helpful—not salespeople or anybody in Mr. Knapp’s
office but a couple of the delivery boys and one of
the cleaning women. The cleaning woman, old Mrs.
Hennessy, works at the store you see, before and
after hours, so she can go to the Knapp house in
the daytime an hour or so to do up the work. And
the delivery boys take turns dropping in nights and
mornings to look out for the furnace and empty
ashes and do the heavy things. They stop in daytimes
too as they go by to see if he wants anything.
Oh, they manage, somehow.”</p>

<p>“How good poor people are to anybody in trouble,”
remarked Jerome comfortably, pulling on his
pipe and wondering for the first time if perhaps
there really might be some truth in that threadbare
remark which he had heard and repeated so many
times and never believed a word of.</p>

<p>“They say Mr. Knapp was always very kind to
them at the store,” said his wife, “the work people,
I mean—was lovely to old Mrs. Hennessy when
her grandson had to be sent to the sanatorium. And
he helped one of the delivery boys out of a scrape.”</p>

<p>The proprietor of the store frowned and took his
pipe hastily out of his mouth. “He <i>did</i>! Which
boy I wonder? What do you suppose he’d been doing?
I’d like to know more about that!” He was
very much vexed at the idea that something about
which he had no information had been happening
at the store. It was just like that impractical,
weak-kneed Knapp to shield an erring employee and
interfere with discipline! He felt again a wave of
the inexplicable annoyance which every contact with
Knapp had caused him from the first time he ever
laid eyes on the man. Helping the delivery boys to
cover up their tracks, was he? Lord! what a dead
loss that man was every way you looked at him.
He didn’t blame Harvey Bronson for being rubbed
the wrong way by him and snapping his head off.
Who wouldn’t?</p>

<p>He remembered suddenly that the man was now
a bed-ridden cripple, cooled down, put his pipe back
in his mouth and said aloud: “Well, I wish you’d
drop in to the Cloak-and-Suits after a week or so
and just get an impression of her yourself.”</p>



<p>Miss Flynn, the veteran head saleswoman in the
Cloak-and-Suits told Mrs. Willing that the new
employee was a wonder, and that the way she had
taken hold made them all sit up. “She’s just eating
it up, Mrs. Willing, just eating it up. She’s learned
her stock quicker than anybody you ever saw, as if
she loved it. Now I never expect a stock-girl to
know where things are inside the first week; they
do <i>well</i> if they do. But Mrs. Knapp—every minute
there wasn’t a customer on hand, would she
fluff up her hair and get out her vanity box or put
her head together with the other girls, turning their
backs on the stairs—not much! Mr. Willing had
told her the way he’s told every stock-girl we’ve
tried, that the first thing to do was to learn her stock
and she went to it as if ’twas to a wedding! With
never a word from me, she just tore off into the
stock-cabinet every chance she got. First off, she
made a list of the things, the way they hung and then
as she worked I could see her look at her piece of
paper, her lips moving, just like a kid learning a
spelling lesson. And yet for all she was so deep in
that, she’d keep her eye out for customers—yes,
she did! You wouldn’t believe a <i>stock-girl</i> would
feel responsible about customers, would you, Mrs.
Willing, when there’s nothing in it for her? But for
a fact she’d keep poking her head out of the stock-cabinet
to make sure nobody had come in; and once
I saw her, when she didn’t know I was looking,
spot a customer coming up the stairs, and go to
stir up that lazy Margaret Donahue to get busy,
and she reading a novel under the counter the sly
way she does behind my back!” Miss Flynn perceived
that she had wandered from the sequence of
her narrative and added now, “Well, by studying
her work like that, it wasn’t three days—really, I
mean it, Mrs. Willing, not <i>three days</i> before she
knew where every cloak and suit in this entire
department was hung, or if it had been sold. I
heard Ellen O’Hern that can’t remember a <i>thing</i>
ask her to bring out that blue knit cape with the
astrachan collar, and Mrs. Knapp say to her, in a
nice quiet tone, so the customer couldn’t hear,
‘That was sold day before yesterday, don’t you remember,
to Mrs. Emery,’ and go and get a blue
broadcloth cape with a white wool collar that was
the closest thing to the other cape. And Ellen
O’Hern made the sale too. It was a good choice.
I asked Mrs. Knapp how she ever happened to think
of picking out just that and she said the customer
just looked to her as though that blue broadcloth
would be her style. I believe she slept nights on that
list of stock she made and said it over as she did
her hair in the morning. Lovely hair she’s got,
hasn’t she, if she <i>is</i> so very plain in the face. And
yet look at the style of her! Sometimes I think
that the plain ones have more style than the pretty
ones, always.”</p>

<p>Before she had finished this aphorism, her Celtic
wit perceived that her Celtic fluency had led her
into what was rather a difficult position when she
considered that she was talking with that important
personage, the young and very pretty wife of the
proprietor; and her Celtic tongue added smoothly,
without so much as a comma, “though of course
there <i>are</i> certain lucky people that have all of
everything.” She smiled meaningly as she spoke,
and told herself with an inward grin that she had
got out of that pretty well, if she did say so....</p>

<p>“Selling goods does polish people up to be the
smooth article,” thought the wife of the proprietor,
“but Miss Flynn thinks she’s just a little too smart.
Flattery that’s too open is not the <i>best</i> salesmanship.
It wears thin if you use it too often. I wouldn’t be
surprised if Miss Flynn had lost more sales than
she thinks with that oily manner. It’s more than
probable that some of the silent country women who
come in here go away without buying because they
think that Miss Flynn is trying to make fools of
them. No, she’s not really Grade A. But she’s so
old she’ll have to get out before so very long anyhow.”</p>

<p>After this silent, inward colloquy, the voices of the
two women became audible once more.</p>

<p>“Don’t you believe, Miss Flynn, that Mrs. Knapp
could be tried out in saleswork soon?”</p>

<p>“I’d try her to-morrow if it was me,” said Miss
Flynn promptly. “I bet a nickel she could knock
the spots off that Margaret Donahue this minute.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes,” Mrs. Willing remembered, “Jerome
had told her that Miss Flynn had that objectionable
habit of ‘playing favorites’ among her girls—the
Irish were so <i>personal</i> anyhow! No abstract ideas
of efficiency and justice.”</p>

<p>Aloud she said, “I’m going to suggest to Mr. Willing
that you let her have a try at noon hours, for the
next week, when some of the girls are out to lunch.”
She added tactfully to avoid seeming to commit the
unpardonable offense of coming in from another department
to dictate to a head salesperson about her
girls, “We’re both of us so sorry for Mrs. Knapp
in her great trouble we would like to help her
along.”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, poor thing! Poor thing!” said Miss
Flynn at once, in a sympathetic tone. But all the
same, something of the substance of the younger
woman’s silent observation had reached her dimly.
What was Mrs. Willing up to? She didn’t like
people nosing around her department that hadn’t any
business there. What was Mrs. Willing, anyhow,
when you got right down to it? Just the advertising
woman, wasn’t she? And what was all this interest
in Mrs. Knapp about? Were they thinking perhaps
of getting rid of another faithful gray-haired employee,
as they had already in other departments.
Her Irish blood warmed. There’d be something said
before....</p>



<p>A few days later, “We were mistaken about that
Mrs. Knapp, Mr. Willing,” said Miss Flynn somewhat
belligerently. “Mrs. Willing said you wanted
to have me try her out in saleswork, so I gave
her a salesbook yesterday, and explained how to
record sales and all, and turned her loose at the
noon hour. But she hasn’t got the stuff in her. I’m
sure of it.”</p>

<p>“What makes you think so, Miss Flynn?” asked
the proprietor of the store mildly. As always when
it was a question of the welfare of the store, he
called in peremptorily every one of his five senses
and all his attention, experience and acumen. On
the aspect, attitude, voice and intonation of Miss
Flynn he focused all of those trained faculties in
a burning beam of which she was happily unaware.
What she saw was his negligent attitude as he tipped
back in his swivel chair, sometimes looking up at
her, sometimes down at the blotting paper on his
desk, on which he drew, as if absent-mindedly, an
intricate network of lines, like a problem in geometry.
She thought that perhaps after all the Willings
were not so dangerously interested in Mrs.
Knapp’s advancement as she had feared, and she relaxed
a little from what had been her intention on
entering the room. It certainly was a fact that
Mrs. Knapp did need a job something terrible, with
those three children and a bed-ridden husband and
all. “Well, I don’t mean that she’s not all right,
well enough, and a good worker and all, but no salesgirl.
Why, let me tell you how she let a customer get
away to-day. <i>Let</i> her get away! Pushed her right
out of the store, I might say; wouldn’t let her buy
what she wanted. I was watching from across the
aisle, without letting on, to see how she’d do. She
was helping out in sweaters because they were short
of help this noon. I saw her showing the goods to
a customer. I heard the customer say, ‘My, isn’t
that lovely!’ and I heard Mrs. Knapp say,—you’d
hardly believe it, I heard her say just as bossy, ‘No,
I don’t believe that is really what you want, Mrs.
Something-or-other, it wouldn’t be suitable for the
purpose you....’ And the customer looking at
the goods as though she wanted to eat it ... it was
a dandy sports sweater too, one of the chickest we
have. Somebody called me off just then, and I
didn’t see what happened afterwards, but after Mrs.
Knapp had gone back to the stock-closet at two, I
went to look and the sweater was still there, <i>and
no sale of a sweater on Mrs. Knapp’s salesbook
either</i>!”</p>

<p>Her horror at such an utter absence of any natural
feeling for the standards of her profession was
sincere and deep. She felt that the recital of the
bare fact needed no embellishment to make its significance
apparent to any man in retail selling.</p>

<p>As she expected, Mr. Willing lowered the corners
of his mouth and raised his eyebrows high as he
listened. He looked down at the geometrical design
he was drawing on the blotting paper. He thought
silently for a moment, gnawing meditatively on one
corner of his lower lip. Then, “I believe I’d better
have a talk with Mrs. Knapp myself,” he said
weightily; “send her in at closing time, won’t you?”</p>

<p>Miss Flynn went off, walking softly, and well
satisfied.</p>



<p>He had made a point of not speaking to Mrs.
Knapp except for a casual salutation since he had
taken her up to the Cloak-and-Suits three weeks
before, and now as she came into the office he looked
at her hard to see what the experience had done for
her, and make out if he could gather from her aspect,
attitude, voice and intonation anything like the rich
illustrative commentary which Miss Flynn had involuntarily
given him.</p>

<p>“How do you like the work, Mrs. Knapp,” he
asked her, in a dry, business-like way, “now that
you have had a little experience of it?”</p>

<p>He was touched, he was actually moved by the
flush of feeling which came into her dark, ardent
face as she answered, “Oh, Mr. Willing, I <i>love</i> it!
I do hope I’ll give satisfaction, for I love every bit
of it.”</p>

<p>Jerome Willing loved it so himself that he felt
warm towards the kindred spirit. “I’m glad of
that,” he said heartily, swept away for an instant
from his usual prudent reserve, “and I think there’s
no doubt whatever that you’ll give satisfaction.”</p>

<p>He added with an instant return to his dry manner,
“I mean, of course, when you’ve learned the
work. There is a great deal to learn.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know,” she said humbly. “I feel how
ignorant I am. But I try to pick up whatever I
can. I’ve been watching with all my might how
the salespeople work. The job of stock-girl gives
you such a splendid chance to watch customers and
salespeople. And yesterday Miss Flynn gave me a
salesbook and let me come out on the floor at noon.
It is very exciting to me,” she said, smiling a little,
deprecating her inexperience and ignorance.</p>

<p>“How did you get along?” asked Jerome, with an
increase of the nonchalant in his tone.</p>

<p>“I was so interested I could hardly breathe,” she
told him. “You’re so used to it all, Mr. Willing,
you can’t think how fascinating it is to me. I’ve
always loved shopping, anyhow, though I’ve had
very little chance to do much. And I’ve thought
about it a great deal, of course, from the customer’s
point of view. Now to be on the other side and to
be able to try to do what I’ve always thought salespeople
ought to do ... it’s wonderful! Of course,
nothing very extraordinary. Just what any experienced
salesperson knows, without thinking about it,
I suppose.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I dare say. What kind of thing?” asked
the proprietor of the store, finding it hard to keep
up his decent appearance of indifference when he
really felt like a hound who, after weary beating
about the bush, strikes a trail as fresh as paint and
longs to give tongue to his joy in a full-throated
bay.</p>

<p>“Oh, all kinds of things, too little to mention.
Just what I’ve noticed in all the years I’ve shopped
... why, here’s one. The way a salesperson gets
up and comes toward you when you come in. I’ve
always loved to have a girl get up quickly, as if
she were glad to see me, and come towards me, looking
right at me with a pleasant welcoming look. It’s
always made me feel cross when they drag themselves
up and come sagging over to me, looking down
at their blouse-fronts or over my head ... or especially
at their finger-nails. Isn’t it queer how it
rubs you the wrong way to have a salesperson look
at her finger-nails?”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s a good point,” said Mr. Willing
guardedly, baying inwardly for joy.</p>

<p>“And then another thing I just love to be able
to do is to know just where to lay my hand on anything.
I’m afraid I’m very quick-tempered and
irritable by nature, and I know I’ve started up
and gone right out of a store, many’s the time, because
the girl who was waiting on me would look
and look for something I wanted, fumbling around
absent-mindedly as if she weren’t really thinking
about it, and then call across to another girl, ‘Say,
Jen, where’d you put that inch-and-a-half binding?’”</p>

<p>The proprietor of the store repressed with difficulty
a whoop of delight over the exactitude of this
snapshot. He looked down neutrally at his desk.</p>

<p>The new saleswoman went on, “I’d always supposed
that it must be ever so hard to know where
things are back of a counter from the way the girls
often act about it. But it’s not! Not for me anyhow!
No harder than knowing where your baking-powder
and salt stand on the kitchen shelf!”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, it’s not hard at all for any salesperson
who puts her mind on it.” Mr. Willing tossed this
off airily and negligently. So successful was his
manner that his employee thought she was being
indiscreet and had forgotten to keep her place.
“I’m taking too much of your time,” she said apologetically,
turning to go.</p>

<p>He kept her with an indulgent gesture, “Oh, no,
you’ll find I’m always interested in anything that
concerns the Store,” he said grandly. “And you
haven’t told me yet about the sales you made in your
first try.”</p>

<p>She looked at him earnestly now and spoke seriously,
“Mr. Willing, there is something that troubled
me, and I’d like to tell you about it. I’d made
two or three sales all right, and then a customer,
Mrs. Warner it was, perhaps you know her, came
in to look at sweaters. We’re just out of the
plain, one-color, conservative kind, though Miss
Flynn said you had some ordered and they’d be
here any day. That was the kind Mrs. Warner
asked for. But she saw another one in the showcase,
a bright emerald-green one with pearl-gray
stripes, the conspicuous kind that young girls wear
with pleated gray crepe-de-chine skirts and pearl-gray
stockings and sandals, and it sort of took her
eye. I knew it would look simply terrible on her—she’s
between forty and fifty and quite stout—the
kind who always runs her shoes over. And I
persuaded her to wait till the plain ones came in.
I thought she’d be better satisfied in the end and
feel more like coming back to the store. But Miss
Flynn thought it was very wrong in me to have let
her get away without making a sale.”</p>

<p>“Why didn’t you try to sell her both sweaters?”
asked the merchant testingly.</p>

<p>“Oh, her husband is only a clerk in Camp’s Drug
Store! They haven’t much money. She’d never
have felt she could afford two. If she’d taken the
bright sporty one she’d have had to wear it for a
year. And I know her husband and children
wouldn’t have liked it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you know her personally?” asked Jerome.</p>

<p>“No, not what you’d call personally—just from
what I’ve seen of her here in the store. She’s quite
a person to come around ‘just looking’ you know.
I guess she loves to look at pretty things as much
as I do. And several times when I hadn’t any customer
on hand, I’ve had a little talk with her to
make friends, and I showed her some of our nicest
things, letting her see that I knew they were nothing
she wanted to buy. I <i>love</i> to show off some of the
pretty young things to women like that, who have
to work hard at home. It’s as good as going to a
party for them. And it gives them the habit of
coming to the store too when they <i>do</i> want something.
Then she happened to mention her name.
I put it down on my list to memorize. I remember
how I always used to like it when a salesgirl remembered
my name.”</p>

<p>“Well, for God’s <i>sake</i>!” ejaculated the young
merchant inaudibly, moved to an almost solemn
thankfulness. Aloud he said, clearing his throat and
playing with a paper-cutter, “Don’t you find it hard
to remember the names of the customers?”</p>

<p>“No,” she said. “I’ve got a good memory for
names naturally. And it interests me. I try to find
out something about the customer, too, to put together
with the name. It seems to keep me from
getting them mixed. This Mrs. Warner, for instance,
I looked up her address in the ’phone book
and found out that she lives near one of my friends
in St. Peter’s parish, and I asked my friend about
her and she told me that Mr. Warner works for
Camp’s. It helps to know something personal, I
think. In odd moments, when I’m walking down
to the store in the morning, for instance, I have
my list in my hand, and try to hitch the people to
the names,—this way—‘J. P. Warner, drug-store
husband, about fifteen hundred a year. Laura J.
Pelman, teacher in Washington Street School, about
twelve hundred. Mother lives with her.’ Inexperienced
in selling as I am, I feel as though I could
tell so much more what people want in merchandise
if I know a little about them.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s so,” he admitted this point without
comment.</p>

<p>He could hardly wait to get home and report this
talk to Nell. She wouldn’t believe it, that was all.
Well, he wouldn’t have believed it either if he
hadn’t heard it with his own ears. And such perfect
unconsciousness on the woman’s part! Apparently
she thought that this was the way that <i>all</i>
salespeople took hold of their work—save the
mark!</p>

<p>“That’ll do for to-day, Mrs. Knapp,” he said with
dignity. “I’m glad to hear you like the work. You
seem to be giving very good satisfaction. We ... we ...” he
hesitated, wondering just how to phrase
it. “We have been meaning to add one more salesperson
to the Cloak-and-Suits, to see if the department
would carry one more. If you like, we will
try you out there, beginning with next week. The
pay is no higher. But of course you get a bonus on
all sales after your weekly quota is reached.”</p>

<p>“Thank you very much, Mr. Willing,” she said,
with some dignity of her own, the dignity of a
mature woman who knows that she is useful.</p>

<p>He liked her for her reserve. She turned away.</p>

<p>He called after her, as though it were a casual
notion, just come into his head, “Are you anything
of a reader? Would you be interested in looking
at a manual on retail selling? I have a pretty good
one here that gives most of the general principles.
Though of course nothing takes the place of experience.”</p>

<p>Her reserve vanished in a flash. Her strongly
marked, mature face glowed like a girl’s. She came
swiftly back towards him, her hand outstretched,
“Oh, are there <i>books</i> written about the business?”
she cried eagerly. “Things you can study and
learn?”</p>





<h3>Chapter 10</h3>


<p>EVANGELINE KNAPP was eating her breakfast
with a good appetite, the morning paper
propped up in front of her, so that she could study
attentively Mrs. Willing’s clever advertising for the
day. She admired Mrs. Willing’s talent so much!
That was something <i>she</i> could never do, not if her
life depended on it! She had always hated writing,
even letters. Everything in her froze stiff when she
took up a pen. But she knew enough to appreciate
somebody who could write. And Mrs. Willing
could. Her daily advertisements were positively
as good as a story—better than most stories because
there was no foolishness about them. This morning,
for instance, as Evangeline sipped her coffee,
she enjoyed to the last word the account of the new
kitchen-cabinets at the Emporium, and Mrs. Willing’s
little story about the wonderful way in which
American ingenuity had developed kitchen conveniences!
Good patriotism, that was, too. She knew
that all over town women were enjoying it with
their breakfast and would look around their own
kitchens to see how they could be improved. The
kitchen-ware department would have a good day,
she thought unenviously, her pride in the store embracing
all its departments.</p>

<p>She moved to the cashier’s desk to pay for her
breakfast, for she took her breakfast downtown,
as the easiest way to manage things at home in the
morning. The children didn’t need to be off to
school until an hour after she left the house, and
this plan left them more time to get their breakfast
without hurrying. The cashier gave her a pleasant
good-morning as he handed over the change, and
asked how all the family were that morning.
Everybody in town knew what troubles Mrs. Knapp
had, and how brave she was about them. As he
asked the question he was thinking to himself, “Nobody
ever heard her complain or look depressed—and
yet how forlorn for a home-body such as she
had always been to get her breakfast in a cafeteria
like a traveling-man!”</p>

<p>“Mr. Knapp is really pretty well,” she answered
cheerfully; “he gets about in his wheel chair wonderfully
well, considering. Takes care of himself
entirely now, even dressing and undressing. And
the children are splendid. So helpful and brave.”</p>

<p>“Your children <i>would</i> be!” said the cashier, who
was a distant relative of Miss Flynn’s. But he really
did admire Mrs. Knapp very much. Evangeline
smiled to acknowledge the compliment, which she
took very much as a matter of course. That was
the kind of thing every one always said to her. She
corrected the smile with a sigh and said earnestly,
“Of course it is dreadfully hard for a mother to be
separated from her children; but we all have to
do the best we can.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, dreadfully,” agreed the cashier sympathetically.
Mrs. Knapp had made the same remark
to him several times before, but he was used
to that. Customers always repeated themselves. It
was part of the business not to notice it. She went
on now, repeating herself again, and he listened with
his usual patience. “The <i>hard</i>est part for me was
to make up my mind to let things go at the house.
If I do say it, I’d always done my duty by my housekeeping.”</p>

<p>The cashier murmured his usual ejaculation of
assent.</p>

<p>“Dr. Merritt had just put his foot <i>down</i> that I
was not to do one thing at the house after I got
home from the store. But you know how it is, you
can’t help yourself when you see all there is to be
done. I used to turn right in those first weeks
and clean house every Sunday from morning till
night. But I had to give it up. I found I was no
good at the store on Mondays, unless I got my rest.
And of course, <i>that</i>....”</p>

<p>“Yes, of course <i>that</i>!” acquiesced the cashier.</p>

<p>“So now I just look the other way and think about
something else,” she said bravely, bestowing the
change in her purse.</p>

<p>The cashier nodded as she turned away, noticing
that she folded her morning paper and put it under
her arm with the exact gesture of any other business-man.</p>

<p>He had sent her away, as he had intended, well satisfied
with life, and as she walked along to her
work, she was turning over in her mind some of
the reasons for her satisfaction. The children were
coming along splendidly, she thought, remembering
lovingly how sweet they had looked this morning
as she kissed them good-by; Helen still in her
petticoat, combing her hair, turning a freshly
washed, rosy face up towards her tall mother;
Henry pulling on his little trousers and reading out
of that absurd conundrum book Lester had borrowed
of Mattie for him; Stephen poking his head out from
under Lester’s bedclothes like a chicken sticking its
downy crest through the old hen’s wings! Stephen
slept downstairs, beside his father’s bed, in a little
cot that slipped under Lester’s bed in the daytime.
He was always scrambling into bed with Lester in
the morning. As she dressed upstairs, she often
heard their voices, talking and laughing together.
Lester had of course plenty of time for that sort of
thing, since he did not have to hurry about getting
an early breakfast for any one. And Stephen
seemed to have passed a sort of turning-point in his
life and was much less troublesome than he had
been. Mattie Farnham had always said that perhaps
Stephen would just outgrow those naughty
spells! She said children often did between five
and six.</p>



<p>As always she was the first of the selling force in
at the doors of the Emporium and the first in her
department. She loved this tranquil taking possession
of the day’s work. It was one of the reasons
why she breakfasted at the cafeteria. She liked to
check up on all the necessary, before-opening-time
activities, and be sure they were all finished in good
shape by the time the first customer came in. This
was not really her business of course, but as she
always willingly lent a hand, the stock-girls and
cleaning women did not object. This morning she
found that the stock-girls had not finished taking
off the covers, and at once began to help, reminding
the stock-boy over her shoulder about the thorough
morning airing which Mr. Willing thought so
important.</p>

<p>What a wonderful man he was! It was an education
to work for him. He never forgot a detail.
“If the air in the store is close and low in oxygen,
the whole selling pace is slower,” he had told her;
“customers are dopy and salespersons can’t stay
right up on their toes as they ought.” How true
that was! And how wise! She had had no idea
there was so much <i>to</i> retail selling.</p>

<p>As her long, quick fingers folded the great covers,
she was thinking of those fascinating books Mr.
Willing had loaned her, books she had devoured as
a child devours fairy-tales, which she was now re-reading
slowly and making her own. The chapter on
textiles, how to distinguish linen from cotton and
all that—how absorbingly interesting that had been!
She had sat up till midnight to finish it. She
had never dreamed that anything in a book could
hold her attention so. How like amateur guesswork
it made all her earlier information seem. And
then to have Mrs. Willing loan her that microscope,
“to keep as long as you need,” to study and analyze
fabrics. How good the Willings were to her! Such
kind young people as well as such awfully clever
and educated ones.</p>

<p>Together with the stock-girl she began running
through her stock to make sure everything was right
before the real business of selling began. She had
timed herself and found that it took her just forty
seconds per suit or cloak to make sure that hooks
and eyes were firmly on, buttons all right, belts
properly tacked in place, and the price-ticket on.
There was therefore no reason why she shouldn’t go
through all the stock for which she was responsible
every morning and lay to one side any garment that
needed attention. Afterwards, rapidly as she sewed,
a quarter of an hour of work with needle and thread,
and there she was, ready for the day, her mind at
peace about her merchandise. If there was anything
she detested it was to see a garment offered to
a customer with a hook hanging loose, or a button
dangling, or to see a saleswoman paw it all over
without finding any price-ticket. It gave her a warm
feeling of comfort to be quite sure that this could
not happen with any of the garments in her department.
Also she enjoyed, sensuously enjoyed,
handling those beautiful, well-made garments, with
their exquisitely tailored details which she who had
struggled so long with the construction of garments
could so professionally appreciate.</p>

<p>And the new merchandise, as it was brought in
from the receiving-room! What a joyful, excitement
to welcome the newcomers, with their amusing
and ingenious little novelties of finish and style and
cut! What a wonderful buyer Mr. Willing was!
Nobody had ever seen such garments in town before,
so simple, so artistic, so perfect! They filled
one’s cup to overflowing with speechless satisfaction,
they were so exactly <i>right</i>! Here was that new
homespun suit, just in yesterday, in that lovely new
shade of mauve. Whoever in <i>that</i> town had heard
of a mauve tailor-made suit? And yet how lovely
it was, and how suitable, even for a middle-aged
woman. Why, yes, especially for a middle-aged
woman! It would be a real comfort to a woman
who had just begun to feel sad over losing her youth.
Every time she put the suit on it would be a kind,
strong reassurance that although youth was going,
comeliness and a quieter beauty were still within
reach.</p>

<p>Evangeline held the suit up, looking at it and
thinking gratefully how it would help some woman
through a difficult year in her life. She remembered
suddenly the Mrs. Warner who had so pathetically
longed for that bright green sports sweater. This
would satisfy her wistful, natural longing for pretty
things and yet be quite suitable for her age. Evangeline
had so much sympathy for women struggling
with the problem of dressing themselves properly
at difficult ages! Of course this suit was much,
much more expensive than anything Mrs. Warner
had ever worn. But, thought Evangeline earnestly,
wasn’t it always the truest wisdom to make any sacrifice
for the sake of getting the <i>real thing</i>?</p>

<p>She slipped it back on the hanger and turned to
that black velours-de-laine fur-trimmed cloak that
had been so slow to sell. What ever was the matter
with it? Why couldn’t they get rid of it! Marked
down as it was by this time, it was a wonderful bargain!
How queer it was about some things, how—quite
mysteriously—they simply did not take.
That black cloak was known all over the floor, and
when a saleswoman got it out to show a customer,
all the other salespersons turned their heads to watch
if this time it wouldn’t go. But it never had.</p>

<p>She looked at it hard, boring her mind into the
problem as deep as she could drive it. But no inspiration
came. The garment went back on the
hanger after an inspection of its fastenings. Ah,
here was the first customer! She turned to greet
her warmly, with the exhilarated dash of a swimmer
running out along the spring-board for the first dive
of the day. “Good-morning, Mrs. Peterson,” she
said, smiling her welcome. “Come to see that
sports suit for your daughter again? I’m so thankful
I can tell you that it is still here. It was almost
sold yesterday. Mrs. Hemingway was considering
it. But it is really much more suitable for your
Evelyn, with that glorious coloring of hers.”</p>

<p>She had plunged off the spring-board with her athletic
certainty of movement. And now she was in
her real element, glowing and tingling, every nerve-center
timed up to the most heartily sincere interest
in what Mrs. Peterson’s daughter would wear that
spring. Evelyn Peterson would look simply stunning
in that sports suit, with those rose-pink cheeks
and her glistening blonde hair! Evangeline gloried
in the brilliant good looks of girls! There was a
period between eighteen and twenty-three when it
was as good as a feast to dress one.</p>

<p>Mrs. Peterson was drawn along after her enthusiasm
as a piece of paper is drawn fluttering
after an express train. She said, “Well, I <i>had</i> come
to say that Mr. Peterson and I have about decided
that it was too expensive a suit for Evelyn, but now
I’m here, I guess I’ll look at it again.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp’s day had begun.</p>



<p>That evening after supper they had the comfortable
game of whist which had come to be one of
the family institutions of late. Lester had taught
Helen and Henry how to play and after Stephen
was in bed in his little cot, sociably close to them,
they usually moved into the next room for a rubber.
Evangeline thought that she thought it rather a
foolish waste of time; but she did not demur, because
she did not like to refuse poor Lester anything
that would lighten his dreary life. She had
liked to play cards in her youth and found that
she had still quite a taste for the game. She played
well, too, and usually held good hands. Henry had,
it now appeared, inherited from her considerable
“card sense” and with her as a partner, they more
than held their end up. Lester and Helen, notoriously
absent-minded, often made fearful mistakes,
which set them all into gales of laughter and advanced
the cause of their opponents notably. One
of the family jokes was the time when Lester, holding
only one trump, had triumphantly led it out as
a sneak lead!</p>

<p>“If it amuses Lester and the children....”
thought Evangeline, dealing the cards swiftly and
deftly, and enjoying herself very much, she and
Henry just now having won their third game in succession.</p>



<p>She did not know that they were all frightfully
uneasy that evening. Stephen had been coming in
and out of the house all day, and just the instant
before Mother was expected, they discovered that
on one occasion he must have climbed up on the
sofa with his muddy rubbers! There were lumps
of crumbling, drying mud all up and down it.
They were wildly brushing it off when they heard
Mother’s quick strong step on the porch and had
scurried to cover. There were lots of lumps left
yet. Suppose Mother should see them.</p>

<p>It was all right so long as they were playing whist.
They had put Mother’s chair with its back to the
sofa. But afterwards, when she and Father settled
down to their evening of reading and studying, what
would happen?</p>

<p>When nine o’clock struck, Helen and Henry stood
up to start to bed. And Mother ... oh! ...
after strolling about absently a moment she went
and sat down on the sofa!</p>

<p>And never said a word. Never noticed a thing!
Just sat there for a moment, thinking, and then
jumped up to make a note in her store-book where
she methodically put down her every idea! How
was that for luck, their shining eyes said to each
other silently, as the children kissed their father
and mother good-night, and went off upstairs.</p>



<p>It had come to her, right out of nowhere, as one’s
best thoughts always come, that the thing to do with
that black, fur-trimmed velours-de-laine cloak was
to sell it to Mrs. Prouty in place of the fur coat
which she coveted so and couldn’t possibly afford.
It would actually, honestly, look better on Mrs.
Prouty’s too-rounded dumpy figure than the fur
coat. Her conviction was instantly warm! The
earnest words came rushing to her lips. She heard
herself saying fervently, “You see, Mrs. Prouty, a
fur coat has no <i>line</i>. The only people who look
well in one are the flat, long, bean-pole variety. But
a well-cut, well-tailored coat like this ... just see
how that flat, strap trimming carries the eye up
and down and doesn’t add to the bulk. And those
great fur cuffs and collar give all the <i>richness</i> of
the fur coat without the....” Oh, she knew she
could do it! She could just see Mrs. Prouty’s wistful
eyes brightening, her anxious face softening into
satisfaction and content.</p>

<p>And what a feather in her cap if she could be the
one to work off that unsalable cloak!</p>




<h2>PART THREE</h2>

<h3>Chapter 11</h3>


<p>IN the hurly-burly of the rearrangement of life,
nobody had been able to pay much attention
to Stephen, and he had reveled in this freedom from
supervision. He had always steered his small, hard
life on a line of his own, a line he strove to make
parallel to the course of the rest of the family, and
never intersecting. Contact with others always
meant trouble in Stephen’s experience—except with
Henry and Helen. Now that the grown-ups had
almost forgotten his existence, he was enjoying life
as never before, under his dirty, crumpled rompers,
stiff with spilled egg-yolk and cold bacon grease.</p>

<p>His father’s accident had made no impression on
his emotions. Events that did not touch Stephen
personally never made any impression on his emotions.
The only element in the new situation which
interested him was that Mother seemed to have forgotten
all about Teddy. This was important. It
made Stephen very glad that Father had fallen off
the roof and broken his legs all up, or whatever it
was. As long as Father stayed in bed, he couldn’t
bother anybody, even when he and Stephen were
left alone.</p>



<p>For, after a time, they were left alone. When the
sick man began to improve so that he was conscious,
and later, occasionally out of pain, there were hours
when the round of volunteer neighbors and helpers
thinned out, when he was left in his bed in the dining-room,
a glass of water, a book, something to eat
and the desk-telephone on a table by his side, with
instructions to telephone if he needed anything.</p>

<p>“Don’t you hesitate a minute now, Mr. Knapp,”
said old Mrs. Hennessy heartily; “if it’s no more
than to put a shovelful of coal on the kitchen fire,
you call fourteen ring thirty-two and I’ll be right
over.”</p>

<p>“And when Stephen gets to acting up, just shake
the window-curtain real hard and I’ll drop everything
to come over and settle him,” said Mrs.
Anderson zestfully.</p>

<p>So far Stephen had not “acted up.” Probably,
so Mrs. Anderson told Mrs. Knapp, “because as
things are now he’s let to do just what he pleases
and goodness knows what <i>that</i> is!” Stephen had
even been a stimulating element in his father’s days
when they first began to emerge from the endless
nightmare of pain and to become, once more, successive
stages in a human life.</p>

<p>Lester never spoke to any one about those first
weeks after his fall and thought of them himself
as little as possible. The mere casual mention of
them afterwards brought the cold sweat out on him.
No circle in any hell would have contained more
concentrated suffering than was crowded into his
every conscious moment—horrible, brute, physical
suffering, tearing at every nerve, suffering that degraded
him, that left him no humanity. When this
was deadened for an instant by opiates or exhaustion,
there were terrible hallucinations—he was
again on the steep, icy roof, turning, death in his
heart, to throw himself down into cold nothingness—he
was falling, falling, endlessly falling ...
and now he knew what intolerable anguish awaited
him at the end of his fall. He screamed out dreadfully
at such times and tore at the bedclothes as
if to save himself. These moments of frenzy always
ended by his coming to himself with a great start
and finding himself burning and raging once more
in unendurable physical pain.</p>

<p>Later, once in a while, there were fleeting instants
almost of lucidity during which, as he was flung
through space by the whirlwind of that inhuman,
impersonal agony, he yet caught glimpses as it were
of his own personality lying there prone, waiting
for him to come back to enter it. This half-consciousness
always brought the same thought to him....
“Poor weak wretch! He had not even force
enough to kill himself!” He thought it as of some
one else, half-pityingly, half-contemptuously.</p>

<p>Then came periods of freedom from pain, incredulous,
breathless bliss, poisoned by his horrified apprehension
of being touched; for the slightest touch,
even of the bed, plunged him again into the abyss.</p>

<p>During one of those respites when he lay, scarcely
daring to breathe, there came to him the first personal
sensation since his fall. He chanced to lie
with his head turned towards the room, and for a
moment he saw it, as it was, a part of human life,
and not merely the background for this endless dying
of his! On the floor sat Stephen, very dirty
and uncared for, playing with his Teddy-bear! The
expression on his face reminded Lester of something
... something, it seemed, which had begun, something
with which he had wanted to go on. But just
then Eva had brushed his pillow, and this glimpse
back into the human life out of which he had hurled
himself vanished in the molten lava of his physical
pain.</p>



<p>Little by little, some unsuspected and implacable
vitality hidden in his body slowly pushed him, groaning
and unwilling, out of the living death which he
still so passionately desired to make dead death.
The weeks passed, he suffered less. He lay passive
and empty, staring up at the ceiling, counting and
cataloguing all the small blemishes and stains in the
plaster. A little strength seeped slowly back into
his body. One day he found that he could read for
a few moments at a time. He became aware of
the life that went on about him. Chiefly it was
Stephen’s life, because Stephen was generally in the
foreground of the room.</p>

<p>Lester began to look down at the child as he
played about the floor, watched languidly the expression
on his round, pugnacious face, almost
always dirty now, but, so it seemed to his father,
not always so darkly grim as he remembered it.
But then, he thought again (one of the slow thoughts
which occasionally pushed their way up to his attention),
he had never seen Stephen except in active
conflict with authority.</p>

<p>“I never saw one of my children just living before,”
he meditated. As he lay in bed, a book was
usually open before him, but he looked over it at
the far more interesting spectacle of his undiscovered
little boy.</p>



<p>His first voluntary move back towards life was
on the day when he had his talk with Stephen about
his Teddy.</p>

<p>It began by his remembering suddenly what it
had been which had begun, and with which he had
wanted to go on. The little memory, presenting itself
so abruptly out of his subconsciousness, startled
him into saying impulsively, “Oh, Stephen, come
here a minute. What was it you started to tell me
that day—up in the bathroom, when I was shaving—about
your Teddy?”</p>

<p>The moment he had spoken he realized how foolish
the question was. The day seemed like yesterday
to him because there had been only blackness for
him ever since. But it was two months ago; and
two months for a little boy—how could he have
thought that Stephen would remember?</p>

<p>But, as a matter of fact, Stephen looked as though
he remembered very well indeed. He had started at
the word “Teddy,” had turned instantly suspicious
eyes on his father and had made a clutch at the
stuffed bear over whose head he now stared at the
man in bed, silently, his mouth a hard line, with
the dogged expression of resistance which was so
familiar.</p>

<p>Lester’s enforced observation of Stephen made
this pantomime intelligible to him, in part. Stephen
was afraid something would happen to Teddy. Why
in the world should he be afraid?</p>

<p>On this question he put his attention, watching
Stephen closely as he said laughingly, “What’s the
matter with you, old man? Do you think I want to
take Teddy away to play with him myself?”</p>

<p>Stephen’s face relaxed a very little at this. His
eyes searched his father’s, deeply and gravely, with
an intense wary seriousness, as a white traveler, lost
in a jungle amongst savages, might search the eyes
of one of the tribe who offered a friendly aspect.
Could he be trusted? Or was this just another of
their cannibalistic wiles?</p>

<p>“I like your Teddy fine,” continued Lester, conversationally.
“I always liked the way he snuggles
up to you in your bed. I used to wake up and look
over at him sometimes. But I’m afraid I’m too old
to play with him, myself.”</p>

<p>At the mention of Teddy’s sleeping beside him,
Stephen looked away and down into the bright,
opaque eyes of his fetish, and as he did this, his
father felt an acute shock of surprise. The child’s
face was passionately tender and loving. He looked
as his own mother had looked when she held her
first baby in her arms. Lester was so astonished
that he was obliged to wait a moment before he
could command his voice to casual negligence.</p>

<p>“So you don’t remember what it was you were
going to ask me about Teddy?” he said, presently.
“Well, it <i>was</i> quite a while ago.”</p>

<p>So far he had not induced Stephen to say a single
word. That was always Stephen’s way of resisting
talk, and persuasion, and attempts to reach him.</p>

<p>Lester held his book up again and waited.</p>

<p>He waited a long time.</p>

<p>But waiting was one thing which circumstances
made easy for him. There was little else a paralyzed
man could do. Stephen sat motionless, his
face a blank, staring into space. His father felt the
uncertainty and questioning going on under that
self-protective front of stolidity. Presently, a long
time afterwards, the little boy got up and came
slowly towards his father’s bed. “Yes, I ’member
what it was,” he said in a low tone, keeping his
eyes fixed intently on the expression of his father’s
face. “I wanted to ask you ... to ask you not
to let Mother ...” his voice dropped to a solemn,
quavering whisper, “... not to let Mother <i>wash</i>
Teddy.”</p>

<p>Lester survived the entire and grotesque unexpectedness
of this with no more sign of his amazement
than a flicker of his eyelids. He considered a
dozen different ways of advancing into the undiscovered
country and rejected them all in favor of
the neutral question, “Was Mother going to wash
Teddy?”</p>

<p>At this it all came out in a storm, the visit to the
lady, the horrible, misshapen, shrunken Teddy there,
Mother’s stealing Teddy away at night, the devouring
dread in Stephen’s mind, a dread so great that
it now overcame even his fierce pride and his anger,
as he sobbed out at the last, “Don’t let him be
washed, Father! <i>Don’t</i> let him!” He raised his
streaming eyes agonizingly towards his father, his
whole face quivering.</p>

<p>Lester was so horrified that for a moment he
could not speak. He was horrified to see Stephen
reduced so low. He was more horrified at the position
in which he found himself, absolute arbiter over
another human being, a being who had no recourse,
no appeal from his decisions. It was indecent, he
thought; it sinned against human dignity, both his
and the child’s.... “As I would not be a slave, so
I would not be a master!” he cried to himself,
shamed to the core by Stephen’s helpless dependence
on his whim, a dependence of which Stephen was
so tragically aware, all his stern bulwarks of anger
and resistance broken down by the extremity of
his fear—fear for what he loved! Fear for himself
would never so have transfigured Stephen, never!</p>

<p>Lester understood this. More, he felt it himself,
felt himself ready to fight for Stephen as Stephen
had been ready to fight for Teddy; he, Lester, who
had never felt that he had the right to fight for
anything of his own.</p>

<p>His gaze on the child had passion in it as he said
firmly, weightily, “I’ll never have anything done to
your Teddy that you don’t want, Stephen. He’s
yours. You’ve got the right to have the say-so about
him.”</p>

<p>Stephen looked at his father blindly, as if he did
not understand these strange words. But though
they were unfamiliar, though he could not understand
them, they gave him hope. “You won’t have
him washed?” he asked, clinging to the one point he
understood.</p>

<p>“Not washed or anything else if you don’t want
it,” said his father, reiterating his own point. It
seemed to him he could not live another day if he
did not succeed in making Stephen understand that.</p>

<p>To his astonishment, again to his shame, Stephen
burst out with a phrase which had never before
passed his lips except under protest, “Oh, thank
you, Father! Oh, <i>thank</i> you!” he cried loudly,
his lips trembling.</p>

<p>Lester found the child’s relief shocking. It made
him sick to think what a dread must have preceded
it, what a fathomless blackness of uncertainty in
Stephen’s life it must represent. He spoke roughly,
almost as he would to another man, “You don’t have
to thank me, Stevie,” he said. “Great Scott, old boy,
it’s none of <i>my</i> business, what you do with your
own Teddy, is it?”</p>

<p>Even as he spoke—like a lurid side-glimpse—was
it possible that there were people who would <i>enjoy</i>
thanks extorted on those infamous terms? Were
they ever set over children?</p>

<p>His insistence seemed to have penetrated a little
way through Stephen’s life-long experience of the
nature of things. The little boy stood looking at
him, his face serious and receptive, as if a new idea
were dawning on him. It was so new that he did
not seem to know what to do with it, and in a
moment turned away and sat down on the floor
again. He reached for his Teddy and sat clasping
him in his lap.</p>

<p>The two were silent, father and son.</p>

<p>Lester said to himself, shivering, “What a ghastly
thing to have sensitive, helpless human beings absolutely
in the power of other human beings! Absolute,
unquestioned power! Nobody can stand that.
It’s cold poison. How many wardens of prisons are
driven sadistically mad with it!”</p>

<p>He recoiled from it with terror. “You have to
be a superman to be equal to it.”</p>

<p>In the silent room he heard it echoing solemnly,
“That’s what it is to be a parent.”</p>

<p>He had been a parent for thirteen years before
he thought of it. He looked over the edge of his
bed at Stephen and abased himself silently.</p>

<p>The child sat motionless, clasping Teddy, his face
bent and turned away so that Lester could not see
its expression. His attitude was that of some one
thinking deeply.</p>

<p>Well, reflected Lester, there was certainly good
reason for the taking of thought by everybody concerned!
He let his head fall back on the pillow
and, staring up, began for the first time since his
fall to think connectedly about something other
than his own wretchedness. For the first time the
ugly blemishes on the ceiling were not like blotches
in his own brain. Presently he forgot them altogether.</p>

<p>That sudden contact with Stephen’s utterly unsuspected
suffering had been like dropping his
fingers unawares upon red-hot iron. His reaction
had been the mere reflex of the intolerable pain it
gave him. Now, in the long quiet of his sick-room,
he set himself to try to understand what it meant.</p>

<p>So that had been at the bottom of Stephen’s fierceness
and badness in those last days of the old life.
So it had been black despair which had filled the
child’s heart and not merely an inexplicable desire
to make trouble for his mother. For Heaven’s sakes,
how far off the track they had been! But however
could they have guessed at the real cause of the
trouble? What possessed the child to keep such a
perverse silence? Why hadn’t he told somebody?
How could they know if he never said a word.</p>

<p>He thought again of the scene in the bathroom
that last morning and saw again Stephen’s wistful
face looking up into his. Stephen had <i>tried</i> to tell
him. And those sacred itemized accounts of Willing’s
Emporium had stopped his mouth.</p>

<p>But Evangeline was always on hand. Why hadn’t
Stephen....</p>

<p>Without a word, with a complete perception that
filled all his consciousness, Lester knew why Stephen
had never tried to tell his mother.</p>

<p>And yet—his sense of fairness made him take up
the cudgels for Eva—it hadn’t been such an unreasonable
idea of hers. Teddy was certainly as
dirty as it was possible for anything to be. You
have to keep children clean whether they like it
or not. Suppose Teddy had been played with by
a child who had scarlet fever? They’d have to have
him cleaned, wouldn’t they? He’d gone too far,
yielded to a melodramatic impulse when he’d promised
Stephen so solemnly they’d never have anything
done to Teddy that he didn’t like.</p>

<p>But as a matter of fact Teddy never had been
near scarlet fever or anything else contagious. And
even if he had, weren’t there ways of dry-cleaning
and disinfecting that would leave the personality of
the toy intact? You didn’t have to soak it in a
tub of soapy water. What was the matter with
wrapping it in an old cloth and baking it in the
oven, as you do with bandages you want to sterilize.
If anybody had had the slightest idea that Stephen
felt as he did.... <i>But nobody had!</i> And that
was the point.</p>

<p>He saw it now. Nothing turned on the question
of whether Teddy should or should not be cleaned.
That purely material matter could have been arranged
by a little practical ingenuity if it had occurred
to anybody that there was anything to
arrange. The question really was why had it not
occurred to anybody?</p>

<p>What was terrifying to Lester was the thought
that the conception of trying to understand Stephen’s
point of view had been as remote from their
minds as the existence of the fourth dimension.</p>

<p>And even now that the violent shock of this little
scene with Stephen had put the conception into his
brain, how under the sun could you ever find out
what was felt by a child who shut himself up so
blackly in his stronghold of repellent silence?</p>

<p>Why <i>had</i> Stephen so shut himself up?</p>

<p>The question was as new to Lester as a question
of the cause of the law of gravity. It had never
occurred to him that perhaps Stephen had not been
born that way.</p>

<p>But even a sullen stronghold of badness was
better than that dreadful breakdown of human dignity.
Lester felt he could never endure it again to
have Stephen look into his face with that slavish,
helpless searching of his eyes. No self-respecting
human being could bear that look from another.</p>

<p>Could there be human beings—women—mothers—who
fattened on it, fought to keep that slave’s
look in the eyes of children? He turned from this
thought with a start.</p>

<p>Well, what good did all this thinking do him? Or
Stephen? What could he do now, at once, to escape
out of this prison and take Stephen with him?</p>

<p>With a heat of anger, he told himself that at least
he could start in to make Stephen feel, hour by
hour, in every contact with him, that he, even a
little boy, had some standing in the world, inviolable
by grown-ups, yes, <i>sacred even to parents</i>.</p>

<p>He breathed hard and flung out his arm.</p>

<p>For the first time he desired to get well, to live
again.</p>





<h3>Chapter 12</h3>


<p>HELEN and Henry Knapp were skipping home
from school, hand in hand, to the tune of</p>


<p>“Skippety hop to the barber-shop</p>
<p>To buy a stick of candy.</p>
<p>One for you and one for me</p>
<p>And one for ...”</p>


<p>They were interrupted by their Aunt Mattie Farnham,
who ran out of the house and pounced on them.
“For goodness’ sakes, Helen ’n’ Henry, tell me about
your folks! I’ve been worried to death about you
all.”</p>

<p>She stopped, looked down at the new black dress
she wore and said, with a decent sigh, “Poor Aunt
Emma passed away a week ago, you know. The
funeral was day before yesterday. I just got home
this morning.”</p>

<p>The children tried, not very successfully, to put
on a decent soberness to match her sigh, and were
silent, not knowing what comment to make. They
had, as a matter of fact, heard (although they had
long since forgotten it) that Aunt Mattie had been
called away clear up to Maine by a telegram announcing
the sickness of her husband’s old aunt.
Usually they missed Aunt Mattie fearfully when
she was away from town. But this time the two
months of her absence had been filled far too full
with other events.</p>

<p>Due respect to the abstract idea of death having
been paid, after their fashion, by each of the three,
they reëntered ordinary life with the exclamation
from Aunt Mattie, “Now do tell me how ever in
the living world you’ve managed! How do you
get along? I haven’t heard a thing, not really to
say heard. Mr. Farnham means to do all right,
but he’s no hand to write letters. I’d write and write
and ask him about a million questions about you all,
and all he’d write back would be some little smitch
of news and a lot about the weather! He did tell
me that your Momma has got a job down at Willing’s
and is doing fine. She would! She’s a wonderful
woman, your Momma is. Everybody knows
that. But however do you <i>manage</i> with your poor
Momma away all day and your Poppa the way he
is. How <i>is</i> he? Awful bad?” Her kind fair face
bent anxiously towards them.</p>

<p>It was again as if the children tried, not very
successfully, to put on a decent soberness to match
her expression. They hesitated as if they did not
know exactly what was decorous to say. Then Helen
murmured, “Father was awfully bad at first, they
said. Mother sent us children off to Brandville
to stay with Gramma and Grampa Houghton so we
didn’t know anything about that first part. But
Gramma got sick, and we had to come home. And
Father was lots better by that time.”</p>

<p>“But how do you manage?” queried Aunt Mattie
again. “How can you, with your poor Momma
away? I never thought that house could run a
minute without her. She did <i>ev</i>erything!”</p>

<p>“Oh, we manage all right,” said Helen. “Father
and us children keep the house.”</p>

<p>“Your father! I thought he was in bed!”</p>

<p>“No, he’s able to be up in a wheel chair now.
The janitor of the store’s old father had a wheel
chair and they didn’t sell it after he died and it
was up attic and he brought it to Father. He said
Father had helped him out at the store when his
little boy was sick. Oh, lots of the folks from the
store have come to help out. The delivery driver,
he said he couldn’t ever forget what Father did for
him one time. He won’t tell what it was because
he’s ashamed. Only he wanted to help out, too, and
as long as we had to have a furnace fire he came
in every morning and night to look out for the furnace.
And he steps in daytimes now, when he’s
going by, to see if everything is all right. And old
Mrs. Hennessy, she’s the cleaning woman, she kept
coming all the time to help and bring in things to
eat, pies, you know! She came in nights and mornings
when Father was so bad to do up the work
and wouldn’t take any pay for it. She doesn’t have
to now, do the work, I mean. But she still does the
washings. Only we pay her, of course.”</p>

<p>Aunt Mattie’s look of bewilderment sharpened to
distraction. “You have only got me more mixed
up than ever!” she cried vacantly. “Mercy me! the
furnace, the washings.... Yes, I see about those.
But all the rest! The meals! The housework!
<i>Stephen!</i> When I think of how your poor mother
slaved to....” She looked at them almost sternly
as if suspecting them of levity.</p>

<p>Henry said, “Father and all of us get along. You
see Father’s all right now, only his legs. He can
do anything except walk. And Helen and I do the
walking for him.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Farnham made an exasperated gesture at
their refusal to take in her meaning. “<i>Who does
the cooking?</i>” she shouted desperately, getting
down to bed-rock.</p>

<p>“Father does. We all do,” said Helen. “Father’s
a lovely cook. He’s learning out of the cook-book.
And so am I—learning, I mean. We’re learning together.”</p>

<p>Aunt Mattie’s face instantly smoothed into comprehension
of everything. She had wondered how
they managed without a woman to keep house for
them. Now she knew. They didn’t manage.</p>

<p>“<i>Oh</i> ...” she said, and, “Well....”</p>

<p>She looked at them compassionately. “I’ll have to
get over to your house as fast as ever I can,” she
said as if to herself.</p>

<p>As her eyes dwelt half-absently on the children,
she observed aloud, “Seems to me Henry’s looking
better. Not so peaked. Did that pepsin treatment
of Dr. Merritt’s really do him some good? I never
thought much of pepsin, myself.”</p>

<p>The children looked at each other as if surprised
by something they had not noticed before.</p>

<p>“Why, Henry, that’s so. You haven’t had one
of your sick spells for ever so long, have you?” said
Helen. To her Aunt Mattie she explained, “We’ve
had so much else to think about we haven’t noticed.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Farnham rejected pepsin for another diagnosis.
“<i>I</i> know what ’tis. The visit to your
Gramma and Grampa Houghton! I always told
your Momma that what Henry needed was country
air. There’s nothing like a change of air,
<i>nothing</i>!”</p>

<p>Helen said now, “We’ve got to run along, Aunt
Mattie. We help about lunch. Father gets it ready,
but we clear off and take Stephen out to play a
while.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that reminds me. How about Stephen?
What does.... Is he.... How does your....”</p>

<p>Her ingenuity was not enough to contrive a presentable
form for her inquiry, but the child came
to her rescue understandingly, “Why, Stephen seems
to be growing out of those naughty streaks,” said
Helen. “He’s lots better, somehow. He still has
a tantrum once in a while, but not nearly so often,
nor so bad. You see, he <i>likes</i> Father’s being sick!”
She knew how shocking this was on Stephen’s part,
and added apologetically, “He’s so little, you know.
He doesn’t understand how terrible it is for poor
Father. And Father tells him stories. All the
time, almost. Stephen loves them. Mother was
always too busy to tell stories, you know.”</p>

<p>“Well, I should say so indeed!” cried Aunt Mattie,
outraged at the picture, even hypothetical, of
poor Evangeline’s attempting to tell stories on top
of everything else she had to do.</p>

<p>“Step along with you, children,” she said now.
“I hadn’t ought to have kept you so long, as ’tis.
But I’ve been worrying my head off about you all.
Tell your Poppa that I’m coming right over there
this afternoon to see him just as soon as I get my
trunk unpacked and things straightened around a
little.”</p>




<h3>Chapter 13</h3>



<p>“He that is down need fear no fall,</p>
<p>He that is low, no pride,”</p>


<p>said Lester Knapp aloud to himself. It was a great
pleasure to him to be able to say the strong short
Saxon words aloud. For years he had been shutting
into the cage of silence all the winged beautiful
words which came flying into his mind! And beautiful
words which you do not pronounce aloud are
like children always forced to “be quiet” and “sit
still.” They droop and languish.</p>

<p>But before this it would have been too foolish to
repeat the lovely lines that came into his mind.
What would Harvey Bronson have thought to hear
“the army of unalterable law” pronounced in the
office of Willing’s Emporium? Lester Knapp smiled
to himself at the idea! And if it hadn’t been Harvey
Bronson at hand it would have been some one else
just as scandalized.</p>

<p>But now there was no one to hear, no one but little
Stephen playing with his toy train on the newspapers
spread out over the floor. A blessed healing solitude
lay about Lester as he sat in his wheel chair in
the sunny kitchen peeling a panful of potatoes. It
had been when he looked down at the gingham apron
spread over his paralyzed knees that the song of
the little shepherd had come to his mind. A gingham
apron on a man! And peeling potatoes!</p>

<p>He supposed that Harvey Bronson would die of
shame if anybody put a gingham apron on him and
expected him to peel potatoes. And yet there was
nobody who talked louder than he about the sacred
dignity of the home which ennobled all the work
done for its sake—that was for <i>Mrs.</i> Harvey Bronson
of course!</p>

<p>Lester Knapp smiled again, his slow, whimsical
smile which Harvey Bronson especially detested
and feared. Then he stopped thinking about his
old associate at the office. The lines which had
come into his mind brought with them all the world
to which they belonged, the strong-hearted, simple,
passionate world of the old cobbler-pilgrim. Where
were those lines? Towards the end of the book,
wasn’t it, just below that quaint marginal note of
<i>Men thrive in the Valley of Humiliation</i>. It was
where the pilgrims were going—yes, now he remembered
the very words with that exactitude of memory
which had been such a golden thing in his
life, “They were going along talking and espied
a boy feeding his father’s sheep. The boy was in
very mean clothes, but of a fresh, well-favored countenance;
and as he sat by himself he sang. ‘Hark!’
said Mr. Greatheart, ‘to what the shepherd’s boy
saith.’ So they harkened.”</p>

<p>Lester Knapp, peeling his potatoes, harkened with
them as he said aloud again,</p>


<p>“He that is down need fear no fall,</p>
<p>He that is low no pride.</p>
<p>He that is humble ever shall</p>
<p>Have God to be his guide.</p>
<p>I am content with what I have</p>
<p>Little be it or much....”</p>


<p>He perceived that Stephen had stopped playing
and was looking at him steadily as he said the words
aloud. With a flourish of his paring knife he went
on, smiling at the little boy, “Then said the guide,
‘Do you hear him? I will dare to say that this boy
lives a merrier life and wears more of that herb
called heart’s ease in his bosom than he that is clad
in silk and velvet!’</p>

<p>“Silk and velvet!” he said with a humorous scorn,
lifting a fold of his gingham apron.</p>

<p>“Is it a ’tory?” asked Stephen, coming up beside
his father’s chair.</p>

<p>“You bet your life it is a story, a crackajack of a
story.”</p>

<p>“Tell it to me,” said Stephen. He leaned both
elbows on the arm of the chair, put his round chin
in his hands, tipped his head to one side and turned
his shining dark eyes up towards his father’s face.</p>

<p>A phrase came to Lester’s mind, the description
of the day when Bunyan had first seen the great
invisible world henceforth to be his heart’s home,
and how it had begun by his seeing in one of the
streets of Bedford, “three or four poor people sitting
at a door in the sun talking of the things of
God.” He and Stephen were poor people too, sitting
in the sun—such golden sunshine as came
through the window into the quiet room and fell
on the head of his little boy.</p>

<p>“Well, Stephen, once upon a time there was a
man,” he began, deciding that the rolling off of the
burden and the fight with Apollyon were most in
Stephen’s line. He wondered if he could find in the
old story stuff to interest a modern little boy, and in
a moment was carried away by it. What a tale it
was! How full of pith and meat and savor!</p>

<p>The potatoes were all peeled before he finished
the story of the fight, so that he laid down his paring
knife and turned entirely to Stephen as they
came to the climax. They had adventured down the
terrible Valley of Death and were now in the hand-to-hand
combat, cut! slash! forward! back! “Then
Apollyon began to gather up close to Christian and
wrestling with him, gave him a dreadful fall; and
with that, Christian’s sword flew out of his hand!”</p>

<p>He paused dramatically. Stephen’s wide eyes
grew wider! His lips were parted. He did not
seem to breathe, all his being suspended on his
father’s words. It was plain he had forgotten where
he was, or who. “Then said Apollyon, ‘<i>I am sure
of thee now!</i>’” said Lester, and Stephen shivered.</p>

<p>“But Christian reached out quick, quick and
snatched up his sword and ran it deep into that
horrible old Apollyon and made him stagger back
to get his breath! And then Christian scrambled
up on his feet and ran at the dragon, shouting! And
with that Apollyon spread out his dragon wings and
sped him away and Christian saw him no more.”</p>

<p>Stephen drew a long breath. “Golly!” he said
fervently.</p>

<p>“Yes, I should say as much,” agreed his father,
pushing his chair over to the stove and dropping
the potatoes into the boiling water. How exciting
it was, he thought, how absorbing, to see those first
impressions of power and courage touch a new human
soul. And when it was your own little boy....
To share with him one of the immortal fine things
created by the human spirit!</p>

<p>He sat still for a moment, remembering the book,
soaking himself in its flavor and color, tasting some
of the quaint, posy-like phrases,</p>

<p>
“Some things are of that nature as to make<br/>
One’s fancy chuckle while his heart doth ache!”<br/>
</p>

<p>Harvey Bronson for instance.</p>

<p>And, “Some people are never for religion until
it walks with silver slippers in the sunshine.” Was
that Mr. Prouty?</p>

<p>Still musing, he wheeled himself into the dining-room
and began to set the table for lunch. Through
the clicking of the silver, Stephen could hear him
say, “His daughter went through the Dark River,
singing, but none could understand what she said
... none could understand what she said.”</p>

<p>It sounded like a song to Stephen, although Father
was only talking to himself.</p>

<p>When he came out again into the kitchen and
began to slice the bacon, he was saying in a loud,
strong voice, “So he passed over, and all the trumpets
sounded for him on the other side! All the
trumpets sounded....”</p>

<p>The words rang in Stephen’s ears. He said them
over to himself in a murmur as he handled his top
absently. “All the twumpets sounded. All the
twumpets sounded on the other side.”</p>

<p>After a time he asked, “Father, what’s a twumpet?”</p>

<p>A question from Stephen!</p>

<p>His father turned his head from the frying-pan
from which the bacon sent up its thin blue wreaths
of smoke. “What’s a trumpet? It’s a great, gleaming
brass horn which always, always has been blown
where there has been a victory—like this!” He
flung up his arm, holding an imaginary trumpet to
his lips, “Taran<i>ta</i>! Taran<i>ta</i>!” He sounded it out
ringingly! “That’s the way they sounded when Mr.
Valiant crossed the Dark River.”</p>

<p>“Taran<i>ta</i>!” murmured Stephen to himself. “And
all the twumpets sounded.”</p>

<p>He sat in the sun on the kitchen floor, looking
up at his crippled father frying bacon. For both of
them the kitchen was ringing with the bright brazen
shout of victory.</p>

<p><i>Men thrive in the Valley of Humiliation.</i></p>





<h3>Chapter 14</h3>


<p>LESTER was glad to see Mattie Farnham come
bustling in the very afternoon of the day she
returned from Maine. He liked Mattie—indeed
he almost loved her—in spite of the fact that so
far as he had been able to ascertain she had never
yet understood anything he ever said to her. They
did not use at all the same vocabulary, but they
held friendly communication by means of sign-language,
like a dog and cat who have grown up
in the same house and have an old affection for
each other.</p>

<p>“Hello there, Mattie,” he welcomed her, as she
entered. “How are the potatoes in Maine? Ours
have spots in them.”</p>

<p>It amused him with Mattie to disconcert her decent
sense of what was the suitable attitude to strike.
He knew that both she and her husband were relieved
to have their ninety-year-old, bed-ridden aunt
safely and painlessly in the next world. Blessed if
he’d go through the motions of condoling with her.</p>

<p>But he saw at once that he had shocked not her
sense of the proper attitude about Aunt Emma but
about himself. She had come over prepared to
“sympathize” with him. Mattie always had to go
through the proper motions.</p>

<p>“How are you getting <i>on</i>, Lester?” she asked earnestly,
with her best Ladies’ Guild flatness of intonation.
“You can’t imagine how I have worried
about you and poor Eva and the dear children. I’ve
been sick to think I wasn’t here to help out in this
sad time. Now I’m back you must let me do everything
I can.”</p>

<p>“You might come and call on Stephen and me
once in a while and bring us some of your famous
home-cooking,” he suggested mischievously. She
laughed, in spite of herself, at his jibe over her
weakness for delicatessen potato salad. “You miserable
<i>sinner</i>!” she cried, in her own voice, dropping
for an instant into their old joking relationship.
She sobered at once, however, into what Lester
called to himself the “mourners-waiting-for-the-benediction
manner” and said, “I was planning as
I walked over how I could arrange my own work
to have two hours free every afternoon and come
here to do for you.”</p>

<p>“You’ll find it all done,” he told her genially.
“You can’t beat me to it. Come along all the same,
and we’ll play cribbage.” She was perplexed as
well as shocked by his levity and at last simply
threw herself on his mercy, “Lester, do tell me all
about things,” she said in an honest, human tone of
affection and concern which brought from him an
answer in kind.</p>

<p>“Well, Mattie, I will. It was hell at first ... all
the kinds of hell there are. But you know how folks
are, how you get used to everything. And I got
better, got so it didn’t make me faint away with
pain to have somebody touch the bed. And then
little by little I settled down to where I am now.
Both legs incurably paralyzed, I’m told, but the rest
of me all right. In the meantime, Eva—you know
how Eva never lies down and gives up—as soon as
I could be left, hustled right out and got a job.
She’s in the Cloak-and-Suits at Willing’s now, and
making good money. What with her commissions
on extra sales, she’s making just about what I did.
With the promise of a good raise soon. The Willings
have treated her very white, I must say. And
I imagine she is the wonder of the world as a saleswoman.”</p>

<p>“She would be, at anything!” breathed Mattie
devoutly.</p>

<p>“She surely would,” agreed her husband heartily.
“Well, here at the house we’ve shuffled things around
into a new pattern, and we’re getting on. I can do
anything that needs to be done on this floor with
Henry and Helen’s help, and the doctor says I’ll
soon be on crutches and able to get upstairs once
a day. It seemed queer to be doing housework, but
there isn’t another mortal thing I can do but to
keep things running. So I do.”</p>

<p>“Poor Lester!” said Mattie, just as he knew
she would.</p>

<p>“Not on your life!” he told her. “I don’t mind
the work a bit, now I’ve got used to the idea. I can’t
say it is exactly enlivening to be tied up to half your
body that’s dead but not buried, but I haven’t got
anything else to complain of. As to the housework,
I haven’t had such a good time in years. You know
what an absent-minded scut I am, with my head
always full of odds and ends of book-junk I like to
mull over. Well, housework doesn’t interfere with
thinking as account-keeping does, believe me! I
can start my hands and arms to washing dishes or
peeling potatoes or setting the table, and then leave
them to do the job while I roam from China to
Peru. Every time I tried that at the office—the
bottom dropped out. Here I’ve more time for thinking
and for reading too in the evenings! The children
bring the books to me from the Library.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s very <i>brave</i> of you to take it that way,
I’m sure,” said Mattie with a decent sigh of sympathy.</p>

<p>He thought to himself with exasperation that
Mattie’s mental indolence was invincible. She never
made the slightest effort of her own accord to escape
from the rubber-stamp formula in which she had
been brought up. By lively joshing you could occasionally
jolt her into a spontaneous perception of
her own, but the minute you stopped, back she
sank and pulled the cover of the Ladies’ Guild
mummy-case over her. And she was so human
under it,—one of the most human people he had
ever met. As he was thinking all this, by no means
for the first time in his life, she caught out of the
corner of her eye a glimpse of something in the
kitchen over which she now exclaimed in amazement
“What in the name of <i>time</i> is all that litter
of papers on the kitchen floor?”</p>

<p>“All that litter?” he protested. “That’s not
litter, that is an original exercise of the human intelligence
in contact with real life. You encounter
so few of those you don’t recognize one when you
meet it. That is one of the patented inventions of
the Knapp Family, Incorporated.”</p>

<p>She looked at him dumbly with the patient expression
of bewilderment which always brought him
to time. He began to explain, literally and explicitly,
“We have executive sessions, the children
and I, to figure out ways and means to cope with
life and not get beaten by small details. We all
got together on this floor proposition. We put it
to ourselves this way: the kitchen floor has to be
scrubbed to keep it clean. None of us are smart
enough to scrub it. What’s the answer? Of course
Eva must simply do nothing whatever about the
house. The doctor issued an ultimatum about <i>that</i>.
She has all she can do at the store. Well, you
wouldn’t believe it, but Stephen got the answer. He
said, ‘When I paint with my water-colors, Mother
always ’preads papers down on the floor.’</p>

<p>“Done! The attic was piled to the eaves with
old newspapers. Every day Helen or Henry brings
down a fresh supply. We spread them around two
or three thick, drop our grease on them with all the
peace of mind in the world, whisk them up at night
before Eva comes in, and have a spotless floor to
show her. What’s the matter with that?”</p>

<p>“Why, I never heard of such a thing in my life!”
cried Mattie.</p>

<p>“People seemed to think,” reflected Lester, “that
they make an all-sufficient comment when they say
that.”</p>

<p>She got up now and walked to the kitchen door
to gaze down on the paper.</p>

<p>“That’s a sample of the way <i>we</i> do business,” said
Lester to her back. He wheeled himself over to the
table and took out of a work-basket a pair of
Stephen’s little stockings which he prepared to
darn.</p>

<p>Mattie turned, saw what he was doing and
pounced on him with shocked, peremptory benevolence.
“Oh, <i>Lester</i>, let me do that! The idea of
<i>your</i> darning stockings! It’s dreadful enough your
having to do the housework!”</p>

<p>“Eva darned them a good many years,” he said,
with some warmth, “and did the housework. Why
shouldn’t I?” He looked at her hard and went on,
“Do you know what you are saying to me, Mattie
Farnham? You are telling me that you really think
that home-making is a poor, mean, cheap job beneath
the dignity of anybody who can do anything else.”</p>

<p>Mattie Farnham was for a moment helpless with
shock over his attack. When she slowly rose to a
comprehension of what he had said she shouted indignantly,
“Lester Knapp, how dare you say such
a thing! I never <i>dreamed</i> of having such an awful
idea.” She brought out a formula again, but this
time with heartfelt personal conviction, “Home-making
is the noblest work anybody can do!”</p>

<p>“Why pity me then?” asked Lester with a grin,
drawing his needle in and out of the little stocking.</p>

<p>“Well, but....” she said breathlessly, and was
silent.</p>

<p>There was a pause. Then she asked meekly,
climbing down with relief from the abstruse and
unfamiliar abstract to the friendly concrete, “However
in the world did you <i>learn</i> to darn, Lester?”</p>

<p>“Out of a book,” he told her tranquilly. “While I
was still in bed I sent to the Library for any books
they had on housekeeping. They sent me some
corking ones—as good reading as ever I saw.”</p>

<p>“Why, I didn’t know they had books about housekeeping
at the Library!” said Mattie, who was a
great reader of novels.</p>

<p>“I bet I know more about cooking than you do,
this minute,” he said, laughing at her. “Why do
you put your flour for a cream sauce into the butter
and cook it before you add the milk?”</p>

<p>“I don’t,” she said, astonished. “I heat my milk
and mix my flour with a little cold water and....”</p>

<p>“Well, you’re wrong,” he said authoritatively.
“That’s not the best way. The flour isn’t thoroughly
cooked. Fat can be heated many degrees hotter
than water.”</p>

<p>Mattie Farnham felt herself sinking deeper and
deeper into a stupid bewilderment. Was it really
Lester Knapp with whom she sat discussing recipes?
She had come over to sympathize and condole with
him. However in the living world had she been
switched off to cream sauce? She got up, shook
herself and took a step or two around the room.</p>

<p>“Don’t go looking to see if the furniture is dusted
or the floor polished,” said Lester calmly. “We concentrate
on the important things in our house and let
the non-essentials go.”</p>

<p>“I wasn’t thinking about <i>dust</i>!” she told him,
exasperated (although she had been). And then,
struck by a sudden thought, “Where’s Stephen?”</p>

<p>“Out in his sandpile.”</p>

<p>“Why, I thought he ran away if he was left out
of anybody’s sight for a minute. I thought you
didn’t dare let him be by himself for....”</p>

<p>“Oh, Stevie’s all right,” said Lester carelessly;
“he’s coming along like a house afire.”</p>

<p>He wheeled himself to the door, opened it and
rolled his chair out on the porch. A blue-denimed
little figure rose up from the other end and showed
a tousled head, bright dark eyes and a round dirty
face with a calm expression. “I got my tunnel
fixed,” he announced.</p>

<p>“Did you?” asked Lester, with interest. “That
can business did work?” To Mattie he explained,
“Stephen is fixing up a railway system, and the sand
kept falling in on his tunnel. We finally thought of
taking the bottom out of an old baking-powder can.
That leaves it open at both ends.”</p>

<p>“It works dandy,” said Stephen. He now added
of his own accord, with a casual look at Mrs. Farnham,
“Hello, Aunt Mattie.”</p>

<p>It was the first time Mrs. Farnham could remember
that she had ever had a friendly greeting from
Stephen. Eva’s conscientious attempts to make
him perform the minimum of decent salutations, to
come and shake hands and say “How do you do?”
usually ended in a storm of raging stamping refusals.</p>

<p>“Hello, Stephen,” she answered, feeling quite
touched by his friendly tone. He looked very quiet
and good-natured, too. Well, of course, all children
do grow out of their naughty ways if you can only
live till then. She had always said that Stephen
would outgrow his. But she had never believed it.
It was a good idea to have a sandpile for him. Children
always like them. Of course it brought sand
into the house something terrible. Children never
would wipe their feet. But now that any attempt
at real housekeeping had been given up in poor Eva’s
house, a little more or less dirt didn’t matter. She
had as a matter of fact (although she had denied it)
noticed that the corners of the room were very dusty.
And those preposterous papers on the floor! What
a ridiculous idea!</p>

<p>No more ridiculous than having the sandpile on
the porch! Whoever heard of such a thing!</p>

<p>“I should think you’d find it hard to keep the
porch clean,” she said to Lester.</p>

<p>“We don’t,” he said bafflingly.</p>

<p>“Why not have it out in the yard?”</p>

<p>“Some of the playthings would get spoiled by the
rain.” He advanced this as conclusive.</p>

<p>Stephen had squatted down again to his sand.
She went cautiously towards the wide plank to see
what he was doing, prepared to have him snarl out
one of his hateful catch-words: “Go ’way! Go
’way!” or the one he had acquired lately, the insolent,
“Who’s doing this anyhow?”</p>

<p>But what she saw was so astonishing to her that
before she could stop to think, she burst out in an
impulsive exclamation of admiration, “Why, Stephen
Knapp, did you do all that your<i>self</i>?”</p>

<p>Beyond the board lay a tiny fairy-world of small,
tree-lined, pebble-paved roads, moss-covered hills,
small looking-glass lakes, white pasteboard farmhouses
with green blinds, surrounded by neat white
tooth-pick fences, broad meadows with red-and-white
paper cows and a tiny farm wagon with
minute, plumped-out sacks, driving to the railroad.</p>

<p>A large area of her own simple consciousness was
still sunny with child-heartedness, and it was with
the utmost sincerity of accent that she cried out,
“Why, I’d love to play with that myself!”</p>

<p>Stephen looked proudly up at her and lovingly
down at his creation. “You can if you want to.”
He conceded the privilege with lordly generosity.</p>

<p>She got stiffly down on her middle-aged knees, to
be nearer the little world, and clasped her hands
in ecstasy over the “sweet little barn” and the
“darling locomotive.” Why, she remembered now
that she herself had given that toy train to Stephen.
The last time she had noticed it was when, unsurprised,
she had seen Stephen kicking it down the
stairs. Lucky it was made of steel.</p>

<p>“It fits in just great,” said Stephen, also remembering
who had given it. “I never had any way to
play with it before. See, it carries the corn from
this farm to the city. I’m going to start in on the
city to-morrow, over there in that corner, as soon’s
I get the track fixed. Mother is going to bring me
some little houses from the ten-cent store. Mother
brought me the little wagon and horses. She brings
me something ’most every night. Those bags are
filled with real corn-meal.”</p>

<p>“Oh, see the real grade-crossing with the little
‘Look out for the engine’ sign,” cried Mrs. Farnham
rapturously.</p>

<p>They had both entirely forgotten Lester. He
smiled to himself and wheeled his chair back into
the house. Mattie was a fat old darling, that’s what
she was.</p>

<p>He went on darning the little stocking and murmuring
to himself,</p>


<p>“She wars not with the mystery</p>
<p>Of time and distance, night and day:</p>
<p>The bonds of our humanity.</p>
<p>Her joy is like an instinct joy</p>
<p>Of kitten, bird, or summer fly.</p>
<p>She dances, runs without an aim;</p>
<p>She chatters in her ecstasy.”</p>


<p>When Mattie came in, not dancing at all but walking
rather rheumatically as though her knees
creaked, she closed the door behind her and said in
an impressive way, “Lester Knapp, that is a very
smart thing for Stephen to do. I don’t believe you
appreciate it. There’s not one five-year-old child
in a hundred with the headpiece to do it.”</p>

<p>He answered with an impressive manner of his
own, “Appreciate it! I’m the fellow who does
appreciate it! Stephen Knapp is a very remarkable
child, I’d have you to know, Mrs. Farnham.
I bet you a nickel he will amount to more than anybody
else in this whole town if he only gets the right
chance.”</p>



<p>As she walked home, Mattie thought how funny
it was to hear a man going on like a mother, standing
up for the least promising of the children!</p>

<p>But all the same, perhaps there <i>was</i> more to
Stephen than just his cussedness.</p>

<p>How cheerful Lester had seemed! It must be
that his food had set better than usual to-day.</p>




<h3>Chapter 15</h3>



<p>SATURDAYS were great days for “the Knapp
Family, Incorporated.” They were together at
home all day, and always with a great variety of
schemes on hand. In the morning Henry usually relapsed
from his eleven-year-old dignity back into
younger days and played with Stephen, especially
since the sandpile settlement had been started, and
since they had a brood of chickens to care for. Old
Mrs. Hennessy came to give the house the weekly,
thorough, cellar-to-garret cleaning which Lester had
found was the best way to keep Evangeline from
spending Sunday with a mop and broom. In the
kitchen Helen and her father, foregathering over the
cook-book, struggled fervently with cookery more
ambitious than that of the usual week-day.</p>

<p>Helen loved these Saturday morning cooking-bees
as she called them. She and Father had such a
good time together. It was so funny, Father not
knowing any more than she did about it all and
having to study it out from the book. Lots of times
she, even she, was able to give him pointers about
things the cook-book didn’t tell.</p>

<p>For instance, at the very beginning, that historic
first day, long ago, when they had first cooked together
and timorously tried to have scrambled eggs
for lunch, it had been Helen who conquered those
bomb-like raw eggs. Lester had gingerly broken off
the top of one, and was picking the shell carefully
away, when Helen said informingly, “That’s not the
way. Mother gives them a crack in the middle on
the edge of the bowl and opens them that way.”</p>

<p>“How? Show me,” said her father docilely, handing
her another egg. Feeling very important, Helen
took it masterfully and, holding it over the edge of
the bowl, lifted her hand with an imitation of
Mother’s decisive gesture. But she did not bring
it down. She shuddered, rolled her eyes at her
father and said miserably, “Suppose I hit it too hard,
and it all spurts out?”</p>

<p>Her father felt no impulse to cry out bitterly on
her imbecile ineptitude. Rather he sympathized
with her panic, “Yes, raw eggs are the dickens!”
he said, understandingly.</p>

<p>Intimidated, they both looked at the smooth, oval
enigma.</p>

<p>“<i>You</i> do it,” said Helen, with her self-distrusting
impulse to shift responsibility to some one else.</p>

<p>Her father refused with horror to assume it. “Not
on your life!” he cried. “You were the one who’d
seen Mother do it.”</p>

<p>“Doesn’t the cook-book say how to do it anywhere?”
asked Helen, trying to fall back on some
one else. “There is a chapter at the end that tells
you how to take out ink-stains and what to do for
people who have got poisoned, and all sorts of things.
Maybe it’ll say there.”</p>

<p>They laid down the egg to search, but found nothing
in the four hundred pages of the big book that
told them how to break a raw egg.</p>

<p>“Perhaps you could lay it down on a plate and
cut it in two with a knife,” suggested Lester.</p>

<p>Even Helen knew better than this. She knew
better than that when she was <i>born</i>, she thought,
suppressing a pitying smile, “Gracious no! You
would get the shell all mixed up with the insides,”
she explained. They stared again at the egg.</p>

<p>To Helen came the knowledge that responsibility
must be assumed.</p>

<p>“Somebody’s got to,” she said grimly. “I’ll try
again.”</p>

<p>She took the egg in her hand and resolutely struck
it a small blow on the edge of the bowl. The shell
cracked a little.</p>

<p>“That sounds good,” said Lester; “give it another
whack.”</p>

<p>She repeated the blow and, holding the egg up
above her head till she could see the under side, reported
that there was a perceptible crack and some
wetness oozing out.</p>

<p>But that was not enough. She must go on and
see it through. How queer not to have somebody
tell her what to do and make her do it. “I’m going
to try to pull it apart,” she announced courageously,
feeling like a heroine. She got the tips of her fingers
into the tiny crack and pulled, shutting her
eyes.</p>

<p>Something happened. A gush of cold sticky stuff
over her fingers, a little glass-like tinkle of breaking
egg-shell in her hand, and there in the bowl were
the contents of the egg, the golden yolk swimming
roundly in the transparent white.</p>

<p>“Hurrah! Good for you!” shouted her father
admiringly.</p>

<p>But Helen found in her heart a new conscience
which made her refuse to accept too easily won
praise. “No, that’s not right,” she said, frowning
at the crushed, dripping shell in her hand. “When
Mother does it, the stuff comes out nice and clean,
with each half of the shell like a little cup.”</p>

<p>She closed her eyes, summoned all her will-power
and thought back to the times when she had watched
Mother cook.</p>

<p>Mother held it so (Helen went through the pantomime),
she brought it down with a little quick jerk,
<i>so</i>, and then.... “Oh, goody! goody! I know!” she
cried, hopping up and down. “<i>I</i> know. She turns it
over after she’s cracked it, with the crack on the
up-side, and then she <i>pries</i> it open. Give me another
egg.”</p>



<p>Well, it certainly was a far cry from those early
fumbling days, wasn’t it, to now, when both she and
Father could crack and separate an egg with their
eyes shut and one hand tied behind their backs, so
to speak; when they thought nothing of turning out
in a Saturday morning a batch of bread, two pies,
and enough cookies to last them a week. They
didn’t even talk about their cooking much any more,
just decided what they were going to make and went
ahead and made it, visiting together as they worked
like a couple of magpies chattering.</p>

<p>Father often told her poetry as she stepped to and
fro; the kitchen seemed to her just chock-full of
poetry. Father had said so much there the walls
seemed soaked with it. Sometimes in the evening
when she went in just before she went to bed to
get a drink of water or to see that the bread sponge
was all right, it seemed to her, especially if she were
a little sleepy, that she could hear a murmur of
poetry all around her, the way a shell murmurs when
you put it to your ear....</p>


<p>“Now all away to Tir na n’Og are many roads that run,”</p>



<p>“Keen as are the arrows</p>
<p>Of that silver sphere.”</p>



<p>“Waken, lords and ladies gay!</p>
<p>To the greenwood haste away!”</p>


<p>“Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea</p>
<p>But sad mortality o’ersways their power,</p>
<p>How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea....”</p>


<p>It was not water that Helen Knapp drank out of
the tin dipper hung over the sink. It was ambrosia.</p>

<p>And Father told her stories, too, all kinds, lots of
funny ones that set them into gales of laughter!</p>

<p>And they talked, talked about everything, about
her writing, and what she was reading in school,
and the last book she had got out of the Library,
and once in a great while Father would tell her something
about when he went to the State University
and what an exciting time he’d had finding out how
much he loved books and poetry. Helen had never
heard Father speak of those years till now. He
seemed to feel, the way she did, that it was easier
to talk about things you cared awfully about when
you were working together. Helen often wondered
why this was, why she didn’t feel so queer and shy
when she was doing something with her hands, buttering
a cake-tin, or cutting animal-shaped cookies
out of the dough that Father rolled so beautifully
thin. She even found that she could talk to Father
about “things.”</p>

<p>By “things” Helen meant all that she had always
before kept to herself, what she had never supposed
you could talk about to anybody—the little poems
that sprang up in your head; what you felt when
the spring days began to dapple the sidewalks
with shadows from the baby leaves; what you felt
when you woke up at night and heard the freight-trains
hooting and groaning to and fro in the yards—Helen
loved living near the railroad—what you
thought about growing up; what you thought about
God; what kind of a husband you would like to
have when you were big; what kind of children you
hoped you’d have. “I’d kind of <i>like</i> a little baby
boy with curly yellow hair,” she said thoughtfully
one day, as she bent her head over the butter and
sugar she was creaming together.</p>

<p>“Henry was like that when he was little,” her
father said reminiscently. “It <i>was</i> nice. You were
an awfully nice baby, too, Helen. Of course, being
the first, you made the biggest impression on me.
You had ideas of your very own from the time you
began to creep. You never would go on your hands
and knees like other babies. You always went on
your hands and feet, with your little behinder sticking
up in the air like a ship’s prow.”</p>

<p>Helen laughed over that. She loved to have her
father tell all about when she had been a baby, and
how much he had loved her, and how smart she had
been, and sometimes how funny, as on the day
when she had thought Mrs. Anderson had stayed
long enough and had toddled over to her, putting out
a fat little hand and saying firmly, “By-by, Mis’
Anderson. By-by!”</p>

<p>Gracious! How long ago that seemed to Helen,
and how grown-up it made her feel, now that she
was such a big girl, thirteen years old, helping to
do up the week’s baking and all. She felt old and
ripe and sure of herself as she listened to those
baby-stories and wrung out the dishcloths competently.
(She and Father had wrestled with the
question of how to hold the dishcloths when you
wrung them out, as they had wrestled with the
method of breaking an egg, and had slowly worked
it out together.)</p>

<p>She came to feel that talking to Father, when
they were alone together, was almost like thinking
aloud, only better, because there was somebody to
help you figure things out when you got yourself
all balled up. Before this Helen had spent a great
deal of time trying to figure things out by herself,
and getting so tangled that she didn’t know where
she had begun nor how to stop the wild whirl racing
around in her head. But now, with Father to hang
on to, she could unravel those twisted skeins of
thought and wind them into balls where she could
get at them.</p>

<p>One day, as she washed the breakfast dishes for
Father to wipe, she noticed how the daffodils Aunt
Mattie had brought were reflected in a wet milk-pan.
It made her think a poem, which she said
over in her head to make sure it was all right, and
then repeated to Father,</p>


<p>“The shining tin usefulness of the milk-pan</p>
<p>Is glorified into beauty</p>
<p>By the presence of a flower.”</p>


<p>Father listened, looked at the golden reflection in
the pan, said appreciatively, “So it is,” and added,
“That’s quite a pretty poem, especially the last
phrase.”</p>

<p>Helen knew it was pretty. She had secretly a high
opinion of her own talents. Why had she said it
aloud except to make Father think what a remarkable
child she was? She washed the dishes thoughtfully,
feeling a gnawing discomfort. It was horrid
of her to have said that just to make Father admire
her. It was showing off. She hated people who
showed off. She decided ascetically to punish herself
by owning up to her conceit. “I only told that
poem to you because I thought it would make you
think what a poetic child I am,” she confessed contritely.
“It wasn’t really that I thought so much
about the flower.”</p>

<p>She felt better. There now! Father would think
what an honest, sincere child she was!</p>

<p>Oh, dear! Oh, dear! That was showing off too!
As bad as the first time! She said hastily, “And I
only owned up because I thought it would make
you think I’m honest and didn’t want to show
off!”</p>

<p>This sort of tortuous winding was very familiar
to Helen. She frequently got herself into it and
never knew how to get out. It always frightened
her a little, made her lose her head. She felt startled
now. “Why, Father, do you suppose I only said
<i>that</i>, too, to make you....” She lifted her dripping
hands out of the dishwater and turned wide,
frightened eyes on her father. “Oh, Father, there
I go! Do <i>you</i> ever get going like that? One idea
hitched to another and another and another; and
you keep grabbing at them and can’t get hold of
one tight enough to hold it still?”</p>

<p>Lester laughed ruefully. “<i>Do</i> I? Nothing but!
I often feel like a dog digging into a woodchuck
hole, al<i>most</i> grabbing the woodchuck’s tail and
never quite getting there.”</p>

<p>“That’s just <i>it</i>!” said the little girl fervently.</p>

<p>“I tell you, Helen,” said Lester, “that’s one of the
reasons why it’s a pretty good thing for anybody
with your kind of mind, or mine, to go to college.
If you try, you can find out in college how to get
after those thoughts that chase their own tails like
that.”</p>

<p>“You <i>can</i>?” said Helen, astonished that other
people knew about them.</p>

<p>“I suppose you think,” conjectured Lester, hanging
up the potato-masher, “that you’re the only
person bothered that way. But as a matter of fact,
lots and lots of people have been from the beginning
of time! You’ve heard about the Greek philosophers,
haven’t you? Well, that is really about all
they were up to.”</p>

<p>There was a pause, while Helen wiped off the top
of the kitchen table.</p>

<p>Then she remarked thoughtfully, “I believe I’d
<i>like</i> to go to college.”</p>

<p>It was the first time she had ever thought of it.</p>

<p>Oh, no, it was not always recipes they talked
about on Saturday mornings!</p>

<p>And on Saturday nights, as he reached for some
book to take to bed with him, Lester’s hand not infrequently
fell on an old, rubbed, shabby volume
which fell open at the passage,</p>


<p>“The thought of our past years in me doth breed</p>
<p>Perpetual benediction: not indeed</p>
<p>For that which is most worthy to be blest—</p>
<p>Delight and liberty, the simple creed</p>
<p>Of childhood whether busy or at rest,</p>


<p>But for those obstinate questionings</p>
<p>Of sense and outward things,</p>
<p>Fallings from us, vanishings;</p>
<p>Blank misgivings of a creature</p>
<p>Moving about in worlds not realized,</p>
<p>High instincts, before which our mortal nature</p>
<p>Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised:</p>
<p>But for those first affections,</p>
<p>Those shadowy recollections,</p>
<p>Which, be they what they may,</p>
<p>Are yet the fountain-light of all our day,</p>
<p>Are yet the master-light of all our seeing;</p>
<p>Uphold us—cherish—and have power to make</p>
<p>Our noisy years seem moments in the being</p>
<p>Of the eternal silence: truths that wake,</p>
<p>To perish never:</p>
<p>Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavor,</p>
<p>Nor man, nor boy,</p>
<p>Nor all that is at enmity with joy,</p>
<p>Can utterly abolish or destroy!”</p>


<p>From here on, Lester always felt a great tide lift
him high....</p>


<p>“Hence, in a season of calm weather,</p>
<p>Though inland far we be,</p>
<p>Our souls have sight of that immortal sea</p>
<p>Which brought us hither,</p>
<p>Can in a moment travel thither</p>
<p>And see the children sport upon the shore,</p>
<p>And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.”</p>


<p>It was to the shouts of those children, to the reverberation
of those mighty waters that the paralyzed
accountant often slipped quietly from his
narrow, drudging life into the “being of eternal
silence.”</p>




<h3>Chapter 16</h3>


<p>ONE of the most embittering elements of
Lester’s old life had been the absence of
any leisure when he could really think—consider
things consecutively enough to make any sort of
sense out of them. He seemed to himself to live
perpetually in the mental attitude of a man with
his watch in one hand and a heavy valise in the
other running for a train which was already overdue.
How much value would the judgment of such
a man have?</p>

<p>He had always thought he would like to be able
to sit right down quietly to think out a thing or
two. Now he certainly had all the sitting down
quietly that anybody could want. Well, he liked
it as much as he had thought he would. And more!
He brought under his consideration one after another
of the new elements of his new life, holding
them firmly under the lens of his intelligence, focusing
on them all his attention, and to his astonished
relief saw them one by one yield to his analysis,
give up their tortured, baffling aspect of mystery and
tragedy, and lie open to his view, open to his hand,
open to his forward-looking planning. He had never
lived with his family before, he had never seen more
of their lives than the inexplicable and tangled loose
ends over which they all stumbled wretchedly. Now
that for months he had had the opportunity for continuous
observation, he perceived that there was
nothing so darkly inexplicable, after all, nothing
that resisted a patient, resourceful attempt to follow
up those loose ends and straighten out some of the
knots.</p>

<p>Even in the tragic tangle of Stephen’s strange
little nature, Lester felt he had begun to find his
way. He had found out this much: Stephen had
more vitality than all the rest of them put together
(except Eva, of course). And when it did not find
free outlet it strangled and poisoned him, made him
temporarily insane, in the literal sense of the word,
like a strong masterful man shut up by an accident
deep in a coal-mine, who might fall insanely to work
with his bare hands to claw away the obstructing
masses of dead, brute matter that kept him from the
light of day! That was what Stephen made him
think of; that was, so Lester divined, the meaning
of the wild, fierce flame in Stephen’s eyes which had
always so shocked and grieved them. They were of
another breed, the kind who would sit down patiently
and resignedly to die, not fight till the last
minute with bleeding hands.</p>

<p>All but Eva—oh, poor darling Eva! How much
better Lester understood his wife after those few
months of observing her in a life that suited her
than after fourteen years of seeing her grimly and
heroically enduring a life that did not. Was this
Eva the same as the old one? This Eva who came
in every evening tired, physically tired as he had
never seen her, but appeased, satisfied, fulfilled, having
poured out in work she loved the furious splendor
of her vigor.</p>

<p>His heart ached with remorse as he thought of
the life to which he had condemned her. Why, like
Stephen, she had been buried alive in a shaft deep
under the earth, and she had not even had Stephen’s
poor passionate outlet of misdirected fury. What
she thought was her duty had held her bound fast in
a death-like silence and passivity. He remembered
the somber, taciturn, self-contained woman who had
sat opposite him, year after year, at the supper-table.
Could that be the same Eva who now, evening after
evening, made them all gay with her accounts of
the humors of her profession; who could take off a
fussy customer so to the life that even Stephen
laughed; who could talk with such inspired animation
of the variations of fashion that even he
listened, deadly as was his hatred for fashion and
all that it stood for! He had never even suspected
that Eva had this jolly sense of humor! Could it be
the same Eva who so briskly dealt the cards around
every evening and took up her hand with such
interest?</p>

<p>Those evenings of whist had been an inspiration
of his, in answer to two questions he had set himself:
What could he invent that would keep Eva’s
mind off the housekeeping in the evenings? And
what could he and Eva and the children do together,
which they would all really and truly enjoy—what
was some natural manner in which to make
a civilized contact between the two generations and
the widely differing temperaments? It was delightful
to him to see how Eva enjoyed it, how she liked
to win (just think of her caring to win! How young
in nature she remained! She made him feel like
Methuselah!). How cheerily and heartily she
coached Henry along, how the children admired her
skill and luck, and how she enjoyed their admiration.</p>

<p>Heavens! How unhappy she must have been before,
like a Titan forced to tend a miniature garden;
forced to turn the great flood of that inherited, specialized
ability of hers into the tiny shallow channels
of the infinitely minute detail of child-care;
forced, day after day, hour by hour, minute by
minute, with no respite, into a life-and-death closeness
of contact with the raw, unfinished personalities
of the children, from which her own ripe maturity
recoiled in an ever-renewed impatience. Eva always
hated anything unfinished! And nothing around her
ever stayed unfinished very long. How she put
through any job she undertook! She had sat up
all one night to finish that sofa she had so wonderfully
refurbished.</p>

<p>But you couldn’t put through the job of bringing
up children. No amount of energy on your part,
no, not if you sat up all night every night of your
life, could hurry by a single instant the slow unfolding
from within of a child’s nature....</p>

<p>Eva dropped out of Lester’s mind whenever he
thought of this, and he was all flooded with the
sweet, early-morning light that shone from his
daughter’s childhood. He always felt like taking
off his hat when he thought of Helen.</p>

<p>Sometimes when they were working together and
Helen was moved to lift the curtain shyly and let
him look at her heart, he held his breath before the
revelation of the strange, transparent whiteness of
her thoughts. That was the vision before which the
greatest of the poets had prostrated themselves.
And yet the best that had been done by the greatest
of them was only a faint shimmer from the
distant shrine. He understood now how Blake, all
his life-long, had been shaken when he thought of
children, “Thousands of little boys and girls, raising
their innocent hands.” Through all the leaping,
furious, prophetic power of Blake, there ran,
like a sun-flooded stream, this passion of loving reverence
for little girls and boys.</p>

<p>And under his quaintly formal rhymed words, how
Wordsworth’s deep heart had melted into the same
beatitude, “... that I almost received her heart
into my own.” “Into my own!” Helen’s father
knew now how literally a man could feel that about
a little girl.</p>

<p>And yet this did not mean that he thought Helen
was perfect. No, poor child, with her too flexible
mind, her too sensitive nerves, her lack of power
and courage, Helen needed all the help she could
get if she were not to be totally undone by life. He
knew a thing or two about how ruthless life is to
any one who lacks power and courage! Helen must
learn how to stand up to things and not lie down
and give up. He would find ways to teach her ...
yes, he knew wincingly what sarcastic people would
ask, “How could he teach her what he had never
learned himself?” But the fact that he had never
learned himself was the very reason for his understanding
the dire need for it. Perhaps it might
come from athletics. She must learn to play on a
team, how to take rough, careless, good-natured
knocks, and return them and pass on her way. As
soon as he could get about on crutches, somehow—perhaps
he would go to the physical-training teacher
at school and have a talk about Helen. Perhaps he
could get up an outdoor basket-ball team of the
children here on the street. He had plans, all sorts
of plans. Above all, Helen must go to college. It
wasn’t so much, going to college; he had no illusions
about it. For a strong personality like Stephen’s
it might very well not be worth while. But for a
bookish, sensitive, complicated nature like Helen’s,
the more her intelligence was shaped and pointed
and sharpened and straightened out, the better. She
would need it all to cope with herself. She was not
one for whom action, any action provided it were
violent enough, would suffice.</p>

<p>Would it for Henry? How about Henry, anyhow?
How everybody always left Henry out! That
was because there wasn’t anything unusual about the
nice little boy. He was a nice little boy, and if he
grew to his full stature, he would be a nice man, a
good citizen, a good husband. No leader of men,
but a faithful common soldier—well, perhaps a sergeant—in
the great army of humanity.</p>

<p>But he had a right to his own life, didn’t he, even
if he weren’t unusual? You didn’t want everybody
to be unusual. There were moods in which Lester
Knapp took the greatest comfort in Henry’s being
just like anybody else. So much the better for him!
For everybody! There would never be tragedy in
his life, no thwarted, futile struggling against an organization
of things that did not fit him. At times,
too, there was something poignant to Lester about
Henry’s patient, unrebellious attitude. He never
fought to get what he wanted. He stood back,
took what others left, and with a touching, unconscious
resignation, made the best of it. All the
more reason for Henry’s father to stand up for
him, to think of how to get him more of what he
wanted.</p>

<p>He began to plan for Henry now. What would
Henry naturally want? Just what any little boy
wanted. The recipe was well known: Playmates of
his own age, a “gang”; some kind of shack in the
woods to play pirate; games, lots and lots of games;
a pet of his own; perhaps a job at which he could
earn real money of his own to spend on a baseball
mitt or a bicycle.</p>

<p>Why, Henry didn’t have a single one of those
things, not one. And he was eleven years old.</p>



<p>That afternoon when the children came home, he
waited till they had unpacked their minds of the
school-news, and then asked casually, “Say, Henry,
wouldn’t you like to have a puppy to bring up? I
used to think the world of my dog when I was your
age.”</p>

<p>A quick startled look passed between Henry
and Helen, a look rather wild with the unexpectedness
of their father’s question. Henry flushed very
red and looked down dumbly at his piece of bread
and butter.</p>

<p>Helen spoke for him, placatingly, “You see,
Father ... you see ... Mother never wanted
Henry to ... but ... well, Henry <i>has</i> a puppy,
sort of.”</p>

<p>Seeing nothing but expectant interest in her
father’s face, she went on, “Old Mrs. Hennessy’s
Laura had puppies about six weeks ago, and Mrs.
Hennessy said Henry could have one. Henry always
did want one, <i>so</i>. And Henry”—her accent was
increasingly apologetic—“Henry sort of did pick
out one for his. It’s white with black spots.
Awfully cunning. Noontimes Henry runs over from
school to the Hennessys’ to play with it. Mrs. Hennessy
and Laura are weaning the puppies now. He’s
beginning to lap milk. Oh, Father, haven’t they got
the darlingest little red tongues! Henry’s named
him Rex. Mrs. Hennessy said Henry could keep it
at her house, because Mother....”</p>

<p>A new possibility opened before her like the horizon
lifting, “Oh, <i>Father</i>, do you suppose she would
let Henry have it <i>now</i>?”</p>

<p>The “now” referred to the change in Mother
which they all noticed, but never mentioned, even
in so distant a manner as this “now.” It had slipped
out in Helen’s excitement. Lester took no notice
of it.</p>

<p>“Do you s’pose she <i>would</i>?” asked Henry, in an
agitated voice. He was now quite pale.</p>

<p>“Heavens, what a sensitive little chap he is!”
thought Lester. “How worked up he does get over
little things.” Aloud he said, “Well, she might.
Let’s ask her this evening.”</p>

<p>So they did. She came in rather late and pretty
tired. Her feet ached a good deal by nighttime, now
it was warm weather, and Helen usually had a good
hot bath waiting for her when she came. Mother
kissed her and said what a comfort she was before
shutting the door of the bathroom. Helen jumped
happily downstairs, two steps at a time, to help
Father get the supper on.</p>

<p>It was steaming on the table when Mother came
down in the pretty, loose, red-silk house-dress which
she’d bought at the store at such a bargain—for
<i>nothing</i>, as she said. She looked relaxed and quiet
and said she was starved and so glad they had veal
cutlets. It was a joy to watch Mother eat after
her day’s work.</p>

<p>They never washed the dishes in the evenings
now, because, Mother getting her breakfast downtown,
it was no matter <i>how</i> the kitchen looked in
the morning. Henry and Helen piled them on the
new wheeled tray which Mr. Willing had so kindly
sent up, pushed that into the kitchen and put them
to soak, while Father and Mother got Stevie to bed
and lighted the little bedside candle, at which
Stephen loved to stare himself to sleep.</p>

<p>Then they hurried into the living-room for the
evening rubber of whist. Mother’s luck was especially
good that evening, a fact in which they all
took an innocent satisfaction. Mother liked it when
her luck was good.</p>

<p>Then, all of a sudden, the opening was there, and
Father was taking advantage of it in a masterful
way. Mother said something about the two little
Willing girls who had been down at the store that
day with their dog, and Father put in at once, “By
the way, Eva, old Mrs. Hennessy wants to give
Henry one of a litter of puppies her dog has. What
would you say? It’s spring-time. It could be out
of doors mostly.” (How they admired him for being
able to speak so casually. “By the way,
Eva....” He was wonderful. Under the table
Helen’s hand squeezed Henry’s hard.)</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp still had before her eyes the picture
of the two fashionably dressed children and their
fashionably accoutred dog with his studded collar
and harness and the bright tan braided leather of
his leash. She had never thought of dogs in terms
of smartness before. “He’d make a lot of trouble
for you,” she said, looking over at her husband.</p>

<p>“Oh, I’d manage all right. I like dogs,” said
Lester carelessly.</p>

<p>“You’d have to promise, Henry, to keep him out
of this room. I don’t want dog-hairs all over everything.”
(It was the old formula, but not pronounced
with the old conviction. After all she would
not be there to see. She was often surprised that
she worried so little about the looks of the house
nowadays.)</p>

<p>“Oh, I’d never let him in <i>here</i>,” promised Henry
in a strangled voice.</p>

<p>“Well ...” said his mother. She looked down at
the cards in her hand.</p>

<p>There was a silence.</p>

<p>“Who took that last trick?” she asked.</p>

<p>“You did,” said her husband (although he had).</p>

<p>They began to play again.</p>

<p>It had been as easy as that.</p>



<p>Lester had quite forgotten about the dog that
evening as he pottered around the kitchen over some
last tasks. He heard the bathroom door shut and
knew that Eva had gone in for her evening toilet.
At once afterwards his ear caught the stealthy sound
of bare feet on the stairway. He turned his head
towards the door and saw Henry come hurrying in
on tiptoe.</p>

<p>He opened his lips to make some joking inquiry
about whatever it could be that kept Henry up so
late, but the expression on the child’s face silenced
him. Good heavens! Had he cared so much as that
about owning a dog!</p>

<p>Henry came up to him without a word and leaning
over the wheel of the invalid-chair, put his arms
around his father’s neck, leaning his cheek against
his father’s shoulder.</p>

<p>“Oh, <i>Father</i>!” he said in a whisper, with a long,
tremulous breath. He tightened his arms closer
and closer, as though he could never stop.</p>

<p>Lester patted the little boy’s back silently. He
was thinking, “I hope he’ll come like this to tell me
when he’s in love and has been accepted. I don’t
believe he’ll be any more stirred up.” The child’s
body quivered against his breast.</p>

<p>After a time Lester said quietly, “Better get to
bed, old man. You’ll take cold, with your bare
feet.”</p>

<p>Docilely and silently Henry went back upstairs
to bed.</p>




<h3>Chapter 17</h3>


<p>OLD Mrs. Anderson, having borne seven children
and raised three to maturity (not to
speak of having made a business of guiding Mrs.
Knapp by neighborly advice through the raising of
her three), knew what was brewing with Stephen the
moment she stepped into the kitchen. She had been
expecting Stephen to have one of his awful tantrums
again any day. The only reason he hadn’t
so far was because poor crippled Mr. Knapp was
so weak and so indifferent to what the children did
that Stephen was allowed to have his own way about
everything. But foolish indulgence wore out after
a while and only made things worse in the end.
All the regulation signs of an advancing storm were
there. She noted them with a kindling eye.
Stephen’s face was clouded; he gave her a black
look and did not answer her “How <i>do</i>, Stevie dear?”
And as she took a chair, he flung down his top with
all his might. A moment later, as he lounged about
the kitchen with that insolent swagger of his that
always made her blood boil, he gave a savage kick
at his blocks.</p>

<p>Now was the time to give Mr. Knapp some good
advice that would save him trouble in the end. She
never could stand hunchbacks and cripples and had
not liked Mr. Knapp very well even before he was
so dreadfully paralyzed; but she felt it her duty
to help out in that stricken household. “You’ll have
trouble with that child to-day, Mr. Knapp,” she said
wisely; “he’s spoiling for a spanking. Anybody with
experience can see that by looking at him. My!
what a relief ’twill be when he’s out of the house and
goes to school with the others.”</p>

<p>It had been her habit thus to diagnose Stephen
to his mother. And as for the remark about the
relief it would be to have Stephen go to school, it
was threadbare with repetition. She scarcely knew
she had said it, so familiar was it. It astonished her
to have Mr. Knapp look at her as though she had
said something which shocked him. She was nettled
at his look and replied to it resentfully by a
statement of her oft-repeated philosophy of life,
“The only way to manage children, Mr. Knapp, is
never to let them get ahead of you. If you watch
for the first signs of naughtiness and cut it short”—her
gesture indicated how it was to be cut short—“it
doesn’t go any further.”</p>

<p>To illustrate her point she now addressed
Stephen’s listening, stubborn back in a reproving
tone of virtue, “Stephen, you mustn’t kick your
blocks like that. It’s naughty to.”</p>

<p>Stephen instantly kicked them harder than ever
and continued to present a provocatively rebellious
back to the visitor.</p>

<p>Mrs. Anderson turned to his father with the gratified
look traditionally ascribed to the Teutonic warlords
when they forced Serbia into a corner. She
tapped the fingers of one hand rapidly in the palm
of the other and waited for the father of the criminal
to take action. He continued to draw his needle in
and out of the stocking he was darning. His face
looked like Stephen’s back.</p>

<p>What a disagreeable man Mr. Knapp was! She
was not surprised that he had been so disliked by
all the sensible people at the store. And how ridiculous
for a man to be darning a stocking! He might
at least look ashamed of it! Mrs. Anderson disliked
him so much at this moment that she felt
herself trembling and burning, “Well, Mr. Knapp,
you’re not going to pass over a wilful disobedience
like that, I hope,” she said, her voice shaking with
anger as much at Stephen’s father as at Stephen.</p>

<p>“<i>I</i> didn’t tell Stephen not to kick his blocks,” he
said dryly.</p>

<p>Her sense of extravagant rightness in the face of
insane wrongness flamed over her so hotly that she
could scarcely speak. “Well ... but ... but
... oh, I understand! I under<i>stand</i>!” she finally
brought out bitterly. “I understand. You think it
is all right and perfectly proper for Stephen to kick
things around as much as he pleases.”</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp stooped to look into the oven where a
rice pudding was cooking. How ridiculous for a
man to be cooking a rice pudding! “I’m sure I don’t
know why you think you understand anything about
it because I have not told you what my opinion on
the subject is,” he said, over his shoulder.</p>

<p>Stephen’s back became more acutely listening.
He did not understand the big words and he could
not make out his father’s tone, except that, unlike
Mother, he did not get mad at Stephen and begin
to pick on him whenever Mrs. Anderson had been
there a little while.</p>

<p>Mrs. Anderson did not make out Mr. Knapp’s
tone very well herself, except that it was all part of
his intense disagreeableness. A weak poor creature
Lester Knapp was, a perfect failure at everything,
and without even the poor virtue of knowing it.
Besotted in self-conceit into the bargain, though she
had never suspected that before. Poor Mrs. Knapp!
And those poor children! Her mother’s heart ached
for them, left in such hands.</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp went on drawing his thread to and fro
silently. Little by little, out of the air, Mrs. Anderson
drew the information that she had been insulted,
though she had not perceived exactly when.
She felt rasped to the bone. With dignity, she drew
her cape up around her shoulders and prepared
to go.</p>

<p>“Take the advice of an old woman who was bringing
up children before you were <i>born</i>,” she said
solemnly, her voice shaking with the depth of her
feeling. “You’ll find out when it is too late that
they <i>must be made to mind</i>! Everything depends
on that. Mrs. Knapp, their poor mother, understood
that perfectly.”</p>

<p>“Good afternoon,” said Mr. Knapp, very distinctly.</p>

<p>The door closed behind her ungently enough, and
with its slam Lester Knapp felt himself transported
by an invigorating wave of anger such as he had
rarely felt in his life, simple, hot, vivifying rage as
good as a drink of whiskey. It made him feel twice
as alive as usual. “Strange thing, the human mind,”
he thought rapidly. “When I ran into Mrs. Andersonism
in business, it only made me sick, sort of
hamstrung me with disgust. Anything they’d put
their filthy hands on I’d rather <i>let</i> them have than
touch them enough to fight them. But when it
threatens Stephen.... God! I <i>love</i> to fight it!
I’d enjoy strangling that old harpy with my two
hands. She thinks she can bully me by threatening
my vanity, does she? She thinks she can get
her damned old hands on my little boy, does she? I
should say it was enough to have killed four of her
own.”</p>

<p>He looked over at Stephen’s brooding back and
set his stirred and sharpened wits to the problem of
switching Stephen off from the track that was taking
him towards one of his explosions. He had discovered
that Stephen’s salvation at such times was
something hard to do, something Stephen could
struggle with, but not quarrel with. He thought
fast, almost excitedly. Would he think of something
first, or would Stephen blow up first?</p>

<p>Stephen turned away from the pile of his toys
and began to wander about the kitchen, casting a
somber eye on the too familiar things. “Alexander,
Alexander, what new world can I get for you?”
asked his father, unleashing his inventiveness and
sending it leaping forward on the trail.</p>

<p>In a moment, “Say, Stephen, how’d you like to
beat up a pretend egg?” he asked.</p>

<p>Stephen glowered at him suspiciously, but with a
spark of unwilling curiosity in his dark eye.</p>

<p>“Like this,” said his father. He wheeled himself
to the shelf, took down a tin basin, filled it with
warm water, put a bit of soap into it and began to
whip it to a froth with an egg-beater.</p>

<p>Stephen’s face lightened. Ever since he could
remember he had seen his mother playing with that
fascinating toy; ever since he could remember he
had put his hand out for it; ever since he could
remember his mother had said, “No, no, you’d only
make a mess,” and had hung it up out of reach.</p>

<p>He had gone too far towards a nervous explosion
to be able to say “Oh, goody!” or “Give it to me!”
but he held out his hand silently. His father took
no notice of his sullen expression and did not offer
to show him how it worked.</p>

<p>Stephen set the egg-beater in the water and with
perfect confidence began to try to turn the handle.
He always had perfect confidence that he could do
anything he tried. At once the egg-beater slipped
sideways and fell to the floor. Stephen frowned,
picked it up and held it tighter with his left hand.
But he found that when he put his attention on his
left hand to make it hold tight, his right hand refused
to make the round-and-round motion he so
much admired. He had never before tried to do
two different things with his two hands. He took
his attention off his left hand and told his right hand
to make the circular motion. Instantly the whole
thing began to slip. As instantly he flashed his
mind back on his left hand and caught the beater
before it fell. But at once his right hand, left to
itself, stopped turning.</p>

<p>“For him, it’s just like trying to pat your head and
rub your stomach,” reflected Lester.</p>

<p>Stephen was disconcerted by the unexpected difficulty
of the undertaking. He stood still a moment
in the mental attitude of a man who has
caught a runaway pig by the ear and a hind leg and
does not dare let go. He breathed hard and frowned
at the perverse creature of steel in his hand.</p>

<p>His father felt as the spectators at a prize-fight
feel when the second round begins. He prayed
violently that nothing might interrupt the rest of
the bout. Especially did he pray that the old Anderson
imbecile might not come in. If she did, he
would just throw the stove-lid at her head. What
was he for, if not to protect Stephen from marauding
beasts of prey? He himself did not make a
motion for fear of distracting Stephen’s attention.</p>

<p>The little boy went at it again, but with none of
his first jaunty cocksureness, cautiously, slowly,
turning the handle a little at a time. He made no
progress whatever. The combination of the two
dissimilar motions was too much for him. If some
one had held the egg-beater still, he could have
turned the handle, he knew that. But he would
never ask any one to do it. He would do it himself.
Himself! He tried again and again without
the slightest success and began to put on the black,
savage look he had for things that displeased him.</p>

<p>His father followed with sympathy as he toiled
forward into the unmapped jungle of his own mind.
How he stuck at it, the little tyke! And how touching
was his look of outraged indignation at his own
unruly right hand! His father said to himself, half-laughing,
half-wistful, “Poor old man! We’ve all
been there! That painful moment when we first
realize that our right hands are finite and erring!”</p>

<p>He shook with silent mirth over the sudden, hot-tempered
storm which followed in a tropical gust,
when Stephen stamped his feet, ground his teeth,
and, turning red and purple with rage, tried by main
strength to master the utensil. He turned his eyes
discreetly down on his darning when Stephen, with
a loud “Gol darned old thing!” threw the egg-beater
across the kitchen. He felt Stephen suddenly remember
that his father was there and glance apprehensively
up at him. He chose that moment to stoop
again to the oven door and gaze fixedly in at the
bland face of the rice pudding.</p>

<p>But he did not see it. He saw Stephen’s fiery
little nature at grips with itself, and inaudibly he
was cheering him on, “Go to it, Stevie! Get your
teeth in it! Eat it up!” He was painfully, almost
alarmingly interested in the outcome. Would
Stephen conquer, or would he give up? Was there
real stuff behind that grim stubbornness which had
given them such tragic trouble? Or was it just hatefulness,
as the Mrs.-Anderson majority of the world
thought it? He held a needle up to the light and
threaded it elaborately. But he was really looking
at Stephen, standing with his stout legs wide apart,
glowering at the prostrate but victorious egg-beater.
In spite of his sympathetic sense of the seriousness
of the moment Lester’s diaphragm fluttered with repressed
laughter. Cosmic Stephen in his pink gingham
rompers!</p>

<p>He took up another stocking and ran his hand
down the leg. Stephen sauntered over towards the
beater, casually. He glanced back to see if he need
fear any prying surveillance of his private affairs,
but his father’s gaze was concentrated on the hole
in the stocking. Carelessly, as though it were an
action performed almost absent-mindedly, Stephen
stooped, picked up the beater, and stood holding it,
trying experiments with various ways of managing
that maddening double action. His clumsiness,
his muscular inexpertness with an unfamiliar motion,
astounded his father. How far back children
had to begin! Why, they did not know how to do
<i>any</i>thing! Not till they had learned.</p>

<p>This did not seem to him the trite platitude it
would have been if somebody else had said it to
him. It cast a new light into innumerable corners
of their relations with Stephen which had been dark
and pestilential. They hadn’t begun to be patient
enough, to go slow enough. Stephen was to the egg-beater,
to all of life, as he himself would be, put
suddenly in charge of a complicated modern locomotive.</p>

<p>No, Stephen was not! Painlessly, with the hard-won
magnanimity of a man who has touched bottom
and expects nothing out of life for himself, not even
his own admiration, Lester recognized in Stephen’s
frowning, intent look on his problem a power, a
heat, a will-to-conquer, which he had never had. He
had never cared enough about either locomotives
or egg-beaters to put his mind on them like that.
Stephen got that power from his mother. From his
other world of impersonality Stephen’s father saw
it and thrilled in admiration as over a ringing line in
a fine poem. If only Stephen could be steered in
life so that that power would be a bright sword in
his hand and not a poison in his heart.</p>

<p>The clock ticked gravely in the silence which followed.
For Lester the pause was full of grave,
forward-looking thoughts about Stephen. Presently
the little boy come back purposefully to the basin
of water. He put the beater in, and once more tried
to turn the handle. The perverse thing did all that
perversity could imagine, slipped sideways, stuck,
started too suddenly, twice fell to the floor clattering.
Each time Stephen picked it up patiently and
went back to work. Lester ached with fatigue at
the sight of his perseverance. Heavens! <i>Nothing</i>
was worth such an effort as that!</p>


<p>“Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke</p>
<p>The years to bring the inevitable yoke?”</p>


<p>But Stephen did not flinch. He felt he almost
had it. Once he turned the wheel three-quarters of
the way around! His heart leaped up. But after
this it balked continuously. Stephen fetched a long
quavering sigh of discouragement and fatigue. But
he did not stop trying. He could not have stopped.
Something more potent than fatigue held him there.
The tough fibers of his passionate will were tangled
about his effort. He could not stop till he dropped.
He was very near dropping. He scarcely knew
what he was doing, his attention was so tired. But
his hands, his brave, strong little hands kept on
working. His back and legs ached. His shoulders
bowed themselves. But he did not stop.</p>

<p>“Under the bludgeonings of chance....”</p>

<p>murmured Lester to himself.</p>

<p>And then, all at once, it was as though Stephen
had turned a corner. Something rearranged itself
inside his head. Instead of toiling uphill he felt
himself begin to glide down easily. Why, he could
do it! That rebellious right hand of his was suddenly
tamed. Whir-r-r! went the steel spokes flashing
in the white suds. They sang like music in
Stephen’s ears! Whir-r-r! He could hardly believe
it!</p>

<p>Once in a while it stuck or jerked, but he had only
to take thought—Stephen could feel the thinking
place in his head draw together <i>hard</i>—and command
his hand to turn regularly. How it hated to, that
old hand! And how Stephen loved the feeling of
bossing it around!</p>

<p>He turned and turned. The foamy suds frothed
higher and higher! Whir-r-r! The kitchen was full
of the sound.</p>

<p>Stephen threw back his head and, laughing
proudly, looked up at his father. His face was
ruddy and glowing with his effort, with his triumph.
All his fatigue was gone. Whir-r-r!</p>

<p>His father drew a long breath. He felt like
clapping his hands and shouting “Hurrah!” It had
been nip and tuck there for a while. Talk about
the cave-man who had invented the bow and arrow!
If Stephen had been a cave-man he would have invented
the telephone. What a stirring spectacle it
had been. He felt as though he had been reading
some Emerson. Only it was lots better than any
Emerson!</p>

<p>“Well, sir,” he exclaimed to the child, “I certainly
will hate to have you begin going to school!”</p>

<p>The rice pudding was done. He took it out and
put some coal on the fire and glanced at the clock.
Why, it was almost time to expect the other children
in from school. How the afternoon had flown! It
was hard to put your mind on anything but the absorbing
spectacle of Stephen’s advance into life. He
must get out the milk and cookies with which he
welcomed the others in. They always burst in as
soon as possible after four. Sometimes Lester wondered
what they had done before, in the old days,
in the interval between four and six, when he usually
found them waiting for him at the door of the store.
Evangeline used to say that they were “playing
’round” with their school-mates.</p>

<p>He had not noticed that Stephen had stopped turning
the egg-beater and was now looking up hard
into his face, until the little voice asked, “What will
you hate to have me going to ’chool for?”</p>

<p>Lester had to think for a moment before he could
remember what he had said. Then, “Great Scott,
Stevie, why wouldn’t I? I’ll <i>miss</i> you—what do you
think? I’ll be lonesome without my funny, nice,
little boy to keep me company.”</p>

<p>He wondered what made Stephen ask such a question.
The child usually was quick enough to catch
your meaning. He wheeled himself into the pantry
and did not see that Stephen, after standing for a
moment, turned away and went quietly out of the
room. When he came back and found him gone,
Lester thought that probably he had gone upstairs
to look for another toy.</p>



<p>Stephen felt very queer inside, sort of shaky and
trembly. He had never felt like that before. And
the queerness went all over him so that he couldn’t
be sure that he wasn’t making up a queer face that
Father would ask him about. The first thing to do
was to get away where nobody would see him. He
turned away, trying to pretend to walk carelessly
and went into the empty dining-room.</p>

<p>But it didn’t stop. He could feel it, making him
tremble and shake inside. And yet he didn’t feel
sick—oh, no! It was a strange good feeling that
was almost too much for him. It was too big for
him. He was too little to hold it. It seemed to
overflow him, so that he could scarcely breathe, in
a bright, warm, shining flood. And Stephen was
such a little boy! He had never felt anything like
it before. It frightened him and yet he loved it.
He must get off somewhere by himself where he
would be safe—and alone—with the new, strange,
bright, drowning feeling.</p>

<p>Under the stairs—always his refuge—he crept in
on his hands and knees, not noticing the dust which
flew up in his face as he crept. Those corners were
not clean as they had been when Mother kept the
house, but Stephen thought of nothing but that
now the quivering was all over him, even his face
... the way it was when he was going to cry. He
and his new feeling crept farther and farther in, as
far as he could go. He sat down then, cross-legged,
his face turned towards the safe, blind wall. He was
safe. He was all alone. It was dark. He said to
himself so low that there was no sound, “Father will
miss me when I go to school.” Then, lower still,
“Father likes to have me around.”</p>

<p>And suddenly Stephen’s eyes overflowed and his
cheeks were wet, and hot drops fell down on his
dusty hands.</p>

<p>But he was not crying. He knew that. It hurt
to cry. And this did not hurt. It helped. The
water ran quietly out of his eyes and poured down
his cheeks. It was as though something that had
ached inside him so long that he had almost forgotten
about it were melting and running away. He
could feel it hurting less and less as the tears fell on
his hands. It was as though he were being emptied
of that ache.</p>

<p>The tears fell more and more slowly and stopped.
And now nothing hurt Stephen at all. There was no
ache anywhere, not even the old one, so old he
had almost forgotten about it. Stephen felt weak
and empty without it and leaned his head faintly
against the dusty dark wall.</p>

<p>He sat there a long time, it seemed to him, till
little by little he felt the weakness going out of
his legs and the emptiness out of his body. He
must go back to Father now, or Father would wonder
where he was.</p>

<p>But Father would think he had been crying and
would ask him why. How could Father tell the
difference if he saw the wet on his cheeks? Stephen
would have died rather than try to tell any one what
had been happening to him. He did not know at
all what had been happening to him. He would rub
the wet off his cheeks with his hands. Yes, that
would do. Then Father would never know. He
scrubbed vigorously at his eyes and his cheeks with
his fists, and when he felt that there was no dampness
left, he backed out on his hands and knees into
the dining-room again. Was it the same room it
had been when he had crept in? It didn’t seem possible!
It looked so different. And Stephen felt so
different. Like another Stephen altogether. So
light! So washed! So clear! He didn’t seem to
weigh anything at all, but to float through the air
as he walked. Nothing looked to Stephen as it had.
The walls and furniture had a sprightly, cheerful
expression. He waved his hand to them as he floated
out to the kitchen.</p>



<p>Lester had been busy at first getting the four
o’clock lunch ready for the children. He had taken
down from the pantry shelf a paper bag of cookies,
yes, the boughten kind; they happened to be out of
home-made ones. He ought to have been making
some instead of hanging fascinated over Stephen’s
hand-to-hand battle with the universe.</p>

<p>But it was, glory be, no longer such a tragic matter,
the sort of food Henry had! It certainly was
a special provision of Providence that Henry and
Helen were so much stronger than they had been;
that just when they fell into his inexpert hands, they
had begun to outgrow their delicate health. However
could he have managed the care of them if
they had been sick so often as when poor Eva had
been struggling with the care of them? Wasn’t it
all a piece of her bad luck to have had them during
that trying period and turn them over to him just
as her wonderful cooking and nursing had pulled
them through. What a splendid nurse she was!</p>

<p>He poured out a glass of milk apiece for the children
and looked impatiently at the clock. He loved
the moment of their noisy arrival, loved the clatter
of their feet on the porch, the bang of the door
thrown open. Why were they late to-day?</p>

<p>Oh, yes, he remembered. They were due at a
rehearsal of the school-play—Helen’s play—the
one they had worked out together. What fun it
was to have her bring him her little experiments in
writing! He began to think that perhaps she might
have a little real talent. Of course most of what
she set down was merely a copy of what she had
read, but every once in a while there was a nugget,
something she had really seen or felt. This, for
instance, which he had found scrawled across the
fly-leaf of her arithmetic—poor Helen and her hated
arithmetic!</p>


<p>“The measured beats of the old clock</p>
<p>Bring peace to my heart</p>
<p>And quiet to my mind.”</p>


<p>That was the real thing, a genuine expression of
her own personality. How different from the personality
of her mother, to whom the ticking of a
clock could scarcely be anything but a trumpet-call
to action. Different from her father’s personality
too. The clock always said to him,</p>


<p>“But at my back I always hear</p>
<p>Time’s winged chariot hurrying near....”</p>


<p>Ah, what a second-rater he was! How he always
thought of everything in terms of what somebody
else had said! In earlier days when he was a boy
and still thought he might perhaps amount to something
this had been an affliction to him, a secret
shame. But now he did not grieve over it. Since
he had died and come back to this other life, he
took everything and himself, too, more simply, with
little concern for the presentability of the rôle he
was to play. If, honestly, that was the sort of nature
he had, why rebel against it? The only people
who got anywhere by rebelling were rebels to begin
with. And he was not. Why wasn’t it enough, anyhow,
to love the beauties other men had created?</p>

<p>He heard Stephen come back into the kitchen.
He had been gone quite a while after that toy.</p>

<p>“Father,” said Stephen softly, behind him.</p>

<p>Lester started at the color of the little voice.
There was something queer about it.</p>

<p>Cautiously, with his ever-present dread of intruding,
he glanced at Stephen not curiously, but with a
casual air.</p>

<p>The little boy came up to his chair and stood
there, looking up at him with a strange expression
of shining-quiet in his eyes. He had evidently been
crying hard, for his cheeks were covered with the
smeary marks of black where he had wiped off the
tears with his dirty hands. But what on earth could
he have been crying about? There had not been
a sound.</p>

<p>And he did not look like a child who has been
crying. He looked ... he was smiling now ... he
looked like a little golden seraph hovering around
the golden gates.</p>

<p>“Father,” said Stephen in a small, clear voice.
He hesitated, evidently trying to think of something
to say, his shining eyes fixed on his father’s.
Finally he brought out, “Wouldn’t you like me to
bring you a drink of water?” His smile, as he said
this, was dazzling, his voice sweet, sweet with loving-kindness.</p>

<p>“Why, yes, Stevie,” said his father over a lump in
his throat, “I do believe I am thirsty without realizing
it.”</p>

<p>Stephen pushed a chair before him to the sink,
climbed up on it, took down the dipper and held it
under the faucet. The bright water gushed out,
spattering over him, over the floor. He caught half
the dipper full, turned off the faucet, and carried
the dipper awkwardly back to his father, who took
a long drink appreciatively.</p>

<p>“Thank you, old man,” he said as he handed it
back.</p>

<p>Stephen set it back on the table and returned to
hover near his father, smiling up at him speechlessly.</p>

<p>Lester felt the room filled with the flutter of airy,
unseen wings and ached with his helpless wonder
at them. What could have happened? What could
have happened? He held his breath for fear of saying
the wrong thing in his clumsy ignorance. All he
dared do was to smile silently back at Stephen.</p>

<p>“Father,” said Stephen again, although he evidently
had nothing to add to the word, “Father....”
He could think of nothing else to say to express the
mysteriously born fullness of his heart.</p>

<p>“Yes, Stevie,” said his father, his own heart very
full.</p>

<p>“Father ... would it hurt your sick legs very
much if I sat in your lap for a while?”</p>

<p>Lester reached out hungrily and pulled the child
up into his arms. “There’s just one good thing that
can be said about my sick legs, Stephen,” he said,
trying to be whimsical, “they positively cannot be
hurt any more.”</p>

<p>Stephen laughed a little, nestled, turned himself,
and then with a long sigh as though he were very,
very tired, with a sudden relaxation of all his warm
little body, was asleep, his round dark head falling
back limply on his father’s shoulder.</p>

<p>Lester was almost frightened. Had the child
fainted? Was he sick? But the expression on
Stephen’s face was of complete calm. It looked like
a smooth, closed bud, secret and serene, close-wrapped,
all the personality at rest, nothing left but
the tender mask of flesh.</p>

<p>Lester stirred involuntarily a hair’s breadth.
Stephen felt the movement and his eyes flew open
wide for an instant. At first they were shallow
and meaningless in a mere physical opening. Then,
before sleep took him wholly, he recognized his
father, and all that made the little boy Stephen
shone out of his eyes like a candle leaping up
brightly before it goes out. That look was for
Lester. Without stirring, in the exquisite smile of
his eyes, his lips, all his transfigured little face,
Stephen gave himself lovingly to his father.</p>



<p>Long after the burning little spirit had gone elsewhere,
leaving the inert, deep-breathing, warm, small
body on the paralyzed knees, his father sat there, his
lips quivering.</p>

<p>Presently he said to himself, “And I am the man
who, three months ago, was so eager to get out of
life.”</p>




<h2>PART FOUR</h2>

<h3>Chapter 18</h3>


<p>WHEN Evangeline read the little note asking
her to step into Mr. Willing’s office, she
thought of course the new things from Hasenheimer’s
had come, and that Mr. Willing would ask her if
she could come back that evening to help unpack
and place them. But it was Mrs. Willing’s voice
which called “Come in!” to her knock, and the
moment she opened the door she knew by the expression
on Mr. Willing’s face that something important
was on the way.</p>

<p>Mr. Willing waited till she and his wife had gone
through the necessary greetings and then brought it
out flatly, “Mrs. Knapp, Miss Flynn has just told us
that, because of certain changes in her family affairs,
she will be leaving us next month.”</p>

<p>He went on talking after this, but Evangeline did
not need to hear him. She knew everything that he
would say before he said it—all except the salary!
That was certainly more than Miss Flynn had ever
had! And to begin with! There was only one idea
in her head. How soon could she fly to a telephone
to tell Lester the good news. She could never wait
till she went home that evening. She loved Lester
for her certainty that it would make him as happy
as she was, that he would not feel jealous or hateful.
How <i>good</i> Lester was!</p>

<p>She saw on the faces of the two people opposite
her a reflection of what must be on her own. They
understood what the moment was to her.</p>

<p>And to them too. She felt in their voices as they
talked to her a new relationship towards her, a new
respect. They needed her as she needed them. She
was important to them and their splendid work. It
was wonderful to be really useful in a big thing!</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, Mrs. Willing!” she assented with
all her heart, as the younger woman said, “We feel
that you can understand our position. It is not
just a store to us, you see. It is our Life Work.”</p>

<p>This seemed a little flamboyant and feminine to
Mr. Willing, who said correctively, “We think it
rather a remarkable opportunity, all things considered,
for giving good store service. With the support
the store would naturally get from the town
and the farming region around us, we expect,” he
coughed, “we hope to double the business before so
very many years.”</p>

<p>“Oh, more than that!” cried his wife. “Of course
this is confidential, Mrs. Knapp. We wouldn’t want
it to go any further. But since we think of you as
in on the ground floor with us.... If with Mr.
Willing’s poor old uncle’s rusty machinery the store
actually paid expenses, there’s simply no telling what
can be done with a modern organization such as my
husband has worked out in his mind. Better wages,
lower prices, and what merchandise!”</p>

<p>“My idea of <i>good</i> merchandise, Mrs. Knapp,” said
Mr. Willing seriously, “is that it shall be a liberal
education in taste.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Willing put in spiritedly, “Give us ten years’
time and see if the Saturday evening crowds don’t
look different in this town. The clothes they wear
now must give them an inferiority-complex right
down to the marrow of their bones!”</p>

<p>“Give us ten years’ time,” said Mr. Willing, laughing,
“and see if there is a single golden-oak, Morris-chaired
‘best room’ left in town!”</p>

<p>Evangeline felt dazzled by all that was happening;
her promotion; sitting here in such an intimate
way with the proprietors of the business; having
them talk in this wonderful way of their wonderful
conception of what the business really was. It was
her conception too. Every word found an echo in
her heart, although she had not had the education
to express it brilliantly as they did. But she was
uneasy at being away from her post so long. What
would Miss Flynn think? The exquisite surprise it
was to realize that it no longer made any difference
what Miss Flynn thought! She felt an inch taller.</p>

<p>Mr. Willing said now, “I’ve been wanting to have
a talk with you about things in general, and now’s
as good a time as any. We want you to understand
the situation in a comprehensive way, in a large way.
There are certain elements in the retail dry-goods
business which give rise to considerable concern on
the part of....”</p>

<p>“Off on polysyllables!” thought his wife. She cut
in briskly, with the effect of scissors snipping in two
a slowly unwinding tape, “It’s the mail-order houses
and the ten-cent stores we’re afraid of. It’s frightful
how they steal the business of country people
away from where it belongs. The first thing that
has to be done is to give them our dust. And it
can be done by making the store known for such
good personal service and such real attention to customers’
needs that they’ll <i>enjoy</i> coming to the store.
And once they’re inside the doors....”</p>

<p>“After all, how even the best of women see things
in a little, narrow, concrete way!” thought Mr. Willing.
“Nothing big and constructive in their minds.”
Aloud he said with simplicity and dignity, “I was
brought up on a farm myself, Mrs. Knapp, and a
very poor farm. And I have a very special feeling
about our country customers. I know how few occasions
there are in farm life for civilized mingling
with our fellow-men, how little brightness and color
there is in country life. It is my ambition to make
every trip to our store as educative as an afternoon
tea-party for the women-folk on a farm. And I
want every purchase at our counters to help every
fine big farm-boy to shuck off his awkward countrified
ways that put him at such a disadvantage beside
any measly, little, cock-sure, tenement-house
rat!” Experiences of his own past burned in his
voice, “We’re counting on you, Mrs. Knapp, to train
your girls to have just the right manner with country
customers. <i>You</i> know, cordial, but respectful,
friendly, but no soft-soap business.”</p>

<p>“I know <i>just what you mean</i>!” Evangeline burst
out suddenly, with such an earnest conviction that
they stopped talking for an instant to enjoy her oneness
with them. Yes, she would do. She would do.</p>

<p>“My ideal,” said Jerome, “is service. What I
want the store to be is a little piece of the modern
world <i>at its best</i>, set down within reach of all this
fine American population around us. I want to
select for them the <i>right things</i>, the things they
never could select for themselves for lack of training.
With modern methods such as my wife and
I are familiar with, a quicker turn-over with better
salespeople, we can raise—not wages—but commissions
to keep efficiency up to the notch. And we
can lower prices and sell goods that will put our
people on a level with big-city people. For I have
long felt, Mrs. Knapp, that the alarming American
exodus to the cities comes from a nagging sensation
of inferiority that would disappear with the possession
of really satisfactory merchandise. You see,”
he said, smiling at her, “that in our small way, we
will all be contributing to the highest interests of
the country.”</p>

<p>“Of course on a sound business basis,” put in
his wife.</p>

<p>“Oh, of course on a sound business basis,” repeated
the proprietor of the store.</p>

<p>The three shook hands on it with unanimity.</p>





<h3>Chapter 19</h3>


<p>WITH her materials and patterns laid out on
the dining-room table, Mattie Farnham was
trying to cut out a dress for her Margaret, an undertaking
which was going jerkily because of the
arrival, seriatim, of the children from school. They
came in at different times, as suited their different
ages and their rank in the hierarchy of grades.
Little Jim in the first grade was free at two, Loren
in the fourth was turned loose at three, and Margaret
and Ellen appeared soon after four. The hour
of the arrival varied, but the manner was identical:
a clatter of hurried feet on the porch, the bursting
open of the door, and the questing yell of “Mother!
Mo-o-other!”</p>

<p>Mattie always answered with an “Oo-hoo!” on
two notes, adding, “in the di-i-ining-room!” but she
never waited for them to come to find her. She
always laid down her work and all thought of it
and hastened to give the returned wanderer a hug
and kiss and run an anxious eye over his aspect to
see what had happened to him during his day out
in the world.</p>

<p>“Jimmy, you look tired. Did you eat your lunch
good? Come on with me and get a piece of bread
and butter.”</p>

<p>“Say, Mother, Teacher picked me out to say the
good-morning greeting to the whole school this morning
at Assembly.”</p>

<p>“Did she? Which one did you say? Weren’t you
scared? Say it to me. Let’s hear.”</p>

<p>A half hour later they would still be in the pantry,
Jimmy swinging his legs from his mother’s cushiony
lap, telling her between mouthfuls about everything
that had happened in the long interval since
he had seen her last. Mattie listened eagerly, stroking
the hair back from the square white forehead,
gloating greedily over the changing expressions on
the little open, rosy face.</p>

<p>Then Jimmy wanted to know what <i>she</i> was doing
and trotted back with her to the dining-room and
had to have the nature of patterns explained to him,
and hung over her as she worked, rumpling up the
paper and getting in her way, his tongue and hers
flying together.</p>

<p>Somehow it was time for Loren. Wherever had
that last hour gone to? The crash of the opening
door, the shrill whoop of “Mother! Mo-o-other!”
And it all began again, this time with an exciting
account of how Teacher gave Morton Cummings the
awfulest calling-down you ever heard for copying off
of Sadie Bennett’s paper. Both Jimmy and Mother
were spell-bound.</p>

<p>But Margaret’s dress did not progress very rapidly.
At a quarter of four Mattie still had the
sleeves to cut out, and she’d <i>have</i> to put her mind
on them because she hadn’t bought enough dimity
and they would have to be pieced under the arm.
“Loren, you and Jimmy run out and play a while,
won’t you, that’s good boys. Mother’s got to get
this done.”</p>

<p>“Mercy! Evangeline Knapp would have had that
dress all cut out and basted up....”</p>

<p>And then, right out of a clear sky, came the unheralded
thunderbolt of a new idea—how could
it have come like that! She had not thought of
the Knapps, not once all that day. She had been
wrapped up in her work and in the children; yet
the minute she had thought of Eva’s name ... it
was all there, as though she had been studying over
them for weeks! Everything in her head had
shucked together different, like when you look in
a kaleidoscope and give it a shake, and there’s a new
design. Why! Why! One thing after another
came to her ... how could it be she had never
thought of it before? It was so plain now ... why,
yes!</p>

<p>The inquiring shout of Margaret and Ellen had
no response. Surprised and aggrieved, they pushed
on hastily in search of their mother and found her
dropped into a chair by the dining-room table, her
big scissors in her hand, her eyes wide and fixed.
She answered them absently, she hardly looked at
them, she never noticed that Ellen had lost her
hair-ribbon, she interrupted Margaret’s account of
how Maria Elwell’s petticoat had come off by jumping
up and saying suddenly as though she didn’t even
know that Margaret was talking, “See here, girls,
I’ve got to run over to your Uncle Lester’s for something.
You keep an eye on Jimmy, will you?”</p>

<p>What was the matter with Mother anyhow, Margaret
and Ellen asked themselves over their four
o’clock pieces of gingerbread. But they were not
much worried. There was never very much the
matter with Mother.</p>

<p>She hurried so that she was puffing as she went
up the porch steps of the Knapp house—and
yet when she opened the door she did not know why
she had come nor what to say. Henry and Helen
were just in also, enjoying cookies and milk and
telling their father about the events of the day.
The sight of the cookies gave Mattie her cue.</p>

<p>“Do those spice-cookies agree with Henry?” she
asked.</p>

<p>“Sure they do,” said Lester. “Everything does
nowadays! Henry seems to have grown right out
of that weak stomach of his. He eats like a wolf,
I tell him. The doctor says they do sometimes outgrow
those childish things as they get near their
teens.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, as they get near their teens,” said
Mattie.</p>

<p>A moment later she asked, “Helen, aren’t you
fatter than you used to be? Seems as though you
were lots fuller in the face.”</p>

<p>“Did you just get around to notice that, Aunt
Mattie?” said Helen, laughing. “You ought to see
me trying to get into a last summer’s dress. They
don’t come together—my!—there’s that much of a
gap.” She showed with her hands how wide a gap
it was.</p>

<p>“Helen has put on eight pounds,” explained
Lester. “The school nurse says all the children are
gaining like everything, now they serve milk at
recess-time.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, milk at recess-time,” said Aunt Mattie.</p>

<p>Helen and Henry finished their cookies and tore
out to inspect their poultry. The children and
Lester had gone into the chicken-business on a
small scale and were raising some brooder chicks
in a packing-case chicken-house in the back yard.
Stephen was there already, hanging over the low
wire-netting “watching their tail-feathers grow,” as
he said.</p>

<p>Lester quoted this as he wheeled himself to the
open door where Mattie stood looking out at the
children fussing maternally over the little peeping
yellow balls. “Honest to goodness, Mattie, their
tail and wing feathers do come in so fast you can
see them grow.” He added, “<i>I’m</i> watching feathers
grow, too. Stephen is fairly sprouting wings he’s
so good! It’s because he can play out of doors
again, I suppose, after the winter. We’ve had such
lovely weather of late.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it must be because he can play out of doors
again,” said Aunt Mattie.</p>

<p>As they turned back into the kitchen, where a
batch of bread was ready to be put into the oven,
she asked, “Lester, aren’t you better of your indigestion
lately?”</p>

<p>“Sh!” he warned her whimsically, his finger at
his lips. “Don’t mention it aloud. I haven’t had
any in months. But I don’t want it spoken about.
Leave sleeping dogs lie. The doctor always said
it was nervous, you know. I don’t know much about
the geography of my innards, but I’ve thought once
or twice that maybe that awful shake-up my nervous
system got might have sorted things over into the
right pile, as far as digestion goes. It’s not, however,”
he said with a sudden grim, black look at his
paralyzed legs, “a cure for indigestion that I could
recommend.”</p>

<p>The tears sprang into Mattie’s eyes as she turned
her face away, “It’s pretty <i>hard</i>!”</p>

<p>“I don’t pretend it’s any picnic. But it’s of no
consequence of course.” He was able to say this
with a bare and utter sincerity.</p>

<p>“Look here, Lester!” she broke out. “Why
couldn’t you—I don’t believe but what you could
go and be a professor somewhere in a University
or a High School. Professors don’t have to walk
around. And you’ve always set such store by poetry
and books and everything. There can’t be anybody
who’s more....”</p>

<p>Lester broke in with a laugh at her absurdity.
“Why, you dear old girl, you don’t know what
you’re talking about. I’d make a mess of what they
want in a school just as much as at the store. What
makes you think colleges want teachers who love
literature? They want somebody who can make
young people sit still and listen whether they feel
like it or not. They want somebody who can ‘keep
order’ in a class room and drill students on dates
so they can pass examinations. I couldn’t do that!
And I’d loathe forcing literature down the throats
of boys and girls who didn’t want it as I’d loathe
selling things to people who didn’t need them. I’d
be just a dead loss at it the way I always am.”</p>

<p>Seeing that she did not follow this, he added
concretely, “Besides I could no more get a job without
all the right certificates than I could set up shop
as a doctor. Nowadays colleges want you to be a
Ph.D. And there isn’t a cross-roads High School
that’d look at a man who had only had three years
in a State University fifteen years ago and had
been making a failure of keeping accounts in a
department store ever since.”</p>

<p>Mattie recognized the irrefutable nature of all
this. “Yes, I see,” she said sadly.</p>

<p>“Isn’t Mattie the ignorant, impractical old infant!”
thought Lester.</p>

<p>She got up now, with a long breath, and silently
took herself off.</p>



<p>Although it was long past time to start supper, she
did not go home. She went straight down to Willing’s
and into the Cloak-and-Suits. Eva was busy
with customers as usual. “Everybody wants Eva
to wait on them,” thought Mattie, sitting down heavily.
Her eyes were fixed on Evangeline. What a
splendid woman she was, and, now she had some
money to spend on her clothes, what a stylish-looking
woman! There wasn’t anybody in town could
hold a candle to her. Mattie made these reflections
automatically. These were always the first thoughts
which came to her when she saw Eva.</p>

<p>But to-day, ravaged as she was by this new perception,
in which she was so all alone, her mind
dwelt little on style. What she saw to-day was Eva’s
face, alert, interested, sympathetic, and Eva’s eyes,
which had always had, so Mattie remembered, “a
sort of wild look,” now so shining and quiet, looking
from the suits she was showing to her customers.
They were a couple of women from out in the country,
elderly mother and grown-up daughter. Mattie
was too far off to hear what was said, but she understood
perfectly from the pantomime and from
the expression of the three faces, what the situation
was. The two women had thrown themselves on
Eva’s taste to help them make up their minds, and
Eva, looking at them intently, was putting herself
whole-heartedly in their places so that she could give
them her best judgment. How happy she looked!</p>

<p>As she watched, a lump came into Mattie’s
throat, and she felt her eyes hot and misty. What
in time was the <i>matter</i> with her? She swallowed
hard and looked away and tried to think of something
else. But she could not. Lester and Stephen
and Henry and Helen ... and Eva! ... came
and stood before her eyes—her opened eyes.</p>

<p>“My goodness! I mustn’t get to crying here in
the store!” she thought, alarmed, starting up and
going to the window.</p>

<p>When she turned around, Eva’s customers had
made their decision, a momentous one, judging from
the relief on their faces. The three women were
chatting and smiling together, relaxed and cheerful.
Mattie heard Eva say, “I know you’ll take the greatest
<i>com</i>fort in it!” She went with her customers
to the head of the stairs, talking like an old friend.
They shook hands with her, respectfully, cordially.
Then she turned around and came almost running
back towards Mattie. “Mattie, I’ve got something
to tell you,” she said hurriedly, smiling. She looked
around her to make sure no one was near and lowered
her voice, “Miss Flynn’s niece has died and
leaves four little children and their father wants
Miss Flynn—he hasn’t got any relative of his own—to
go and bring the children up and keep house for
him. He’s in the greenhouse business at Cleveland.
Plenty of money. And she is going.”</p>

<p>Mattie did not understand this. She understood
few things at once. She saw nothing but Eva’s curving,
smiling lips and bright shining eyes. She understood
them with no difficulty.</p>

<p>“Don’t you see?” whispered Eva. “Somebody’s
going to be moved up to her place, head of the department.
They’re going to give me a try at it.
Aren’t they good! Mattie! It’s three thousand a
year! And a bonus for extra sales! And such fascinating
work! I’m wild to get my hands on it and
see what I can do with the salesgirls. Oh, Mattie,
we can begin to lay by a little something every
month for the children’s college. Perhaps we can
buy a Ford that Lester can get out in with the children.
Oh, <i>Mattie</i>!”</p>

<p>At this Mattie disgraced herself and showed once
more, as she said apologetically, what an idiot she
was by bursting into senseless, hysteric tears and
having to be carried off in haste to the toilet-room to
cold water and smelling salts.</p>

<p>“I’ve felt all squimbly this whole afternoon,” she
explained, blowing her nose. “I don’t know what’s
the matter with me. Old fool, I guess.”</p>

<p>“Well, it almost makes me feel like crying myself,”
said Eva, holding out a glass of water to her.
“It’s come so soon, so much sooner than I dared
to hope. And it will mean so much to Lester and
the children. They’d never have had a college education
any other way. Why, Mattie, I’ve kept
thinking all day about the hymn, ‘God moves in a
mysterious way, His....’”</p>

<p>“<i>Don’t!</i>” said Mattie huskily. “You’ll get me
started again.”</p>

<p>“Of course,” Eva said now, “it’s dreadfully hard
for a mother to be separated from her....”</p>

<p>Mattie broke in hastily, as if to change the subject,
“Eva, how is that eczema of yours lately?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp rolled up a fashionably wide sleeve
and showed a clean, white upper arm. “Dr. Merritt
finally found a cure,” she said, “a new kind of ointment
he heard about in a medical convention. It’s
worked like a charm. I haven’t had a touch of
eczema—why, in I don’t know when! It took the
doctor long enough to get around to it, but he
finally did.”</p>



<p>It was half-past five when Mrs. Farnham left the
store, but still she did not start home. “<i>Let</i> them
wait for supper!” she thought, desperately. What
was supper compared to some other things! She
hurried heavily along towards Dr. Merritt’s house,
hoping to goodness he would be in.</p>

<p>He was, sitting on the porch, reading the evening
paper. “Hello, Mrs. Farnham,” he said, surprised
to see her. “I didn’t think I’d ever get any business
out of <i>your</i> family. Who’s broken a leg?”</p>

<p>“We’re all right,” she told him. “I wanted to ask
you about the Knapps. You know I’m sort of related
to Mr. Knapp. I’ve been wondering what you
really thought about him ... whether he’ll ever
be cured, I mean.”</p>

<p>The doctor noticed that her voice trembled as she
spoke. What a good-natured creature she was, taking
other people’s troubles so to heart.</p>

<p>He hesitated. It was not at all his habit to talk
about his patients to outsiders, least of all to any
such chatter-box as Mrs. Farnham. But he had
thought several times lately that, if Lester Knapp
were to make any progress, he would need to start
a campaign to dry up the gushing spring of family
sympathy. He knew all about that sort of campaign
from much experience, but he was never resigned
to the necessity for it. “Darn families and
their sympathy!” he often said impatiently. “They
‘poor-Charlie’ and ‘poor-Mary’ more sick people into
their graves than we doctors do.”</p>

<p>He had long suspected that well-meaning Mrs.
Farnham did a good deal of “poor-Lestering” at the
Knapps. Maybe this was a chance to head her off,
to get her mind started along a new track. Of
course he must remember to use the simplest, most
elementary language with her. She was really
almost an illiterate.</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you, Mrs. Farnham, just what I think
about the case. As near as I can make out, the
effusion of blood within the spinal canal has been
safely absorbed, or nearly so. There seems to be no
displacement or injury to the spinal bones; there
is no wasting away of the muscles as would be the
case if the spinal cord were injured. There is, I
believe, good reason to hope that the loss of power
in his legs is a sequel of organic conditions which
have now passed away. The case now needs a psychic
treatment rather than a mechanical.”</p>

<p>“Organic?” said Mrs. Farnham, faintly. The
word made her think of church.</p>

<p>“I mean that in my opinion no physical lesion now
exists in spite of the abnormal sensations which Mr.
Knapp still feels. We must try toning up the
general health, overcoming the shock to the nervous
system. As soon as the weather permits, I shall
try heliotherapy.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Farnham caught her breath.</p>

<p>“That is, treatment of the affected areas by direct
exposure to sunlight. They have done wonderful
things in France with that treatment in just this
sort of trouble. And of course at any time any
sort of sudden nervous stimulus might do the business.
You see, Mrs. Farnham, Mr. Knapp’s case
is now like that of the people who are cured at
Lourdes, or by Coué. The very same sort of phenomenon.”</p>

<p>“I don’t understand very well,” said Mattie
humbly. “What I wanted to know was ...” her
voice faltered, “<i>do you think you can cure him?</i>”</p>

<p>“Isn’t she the dumb-bell!” thought the doctor.</p>

<p>He went on aloud, hoping she would repeat his
words to Mrs. Knapp, “Don’t you say anything
about it, Mrs. Farnham, especially to Mrs. Knapp.
I don’t want to crow till we are out of the woods.
I wouldn’t say anything to you if you were not a
relative and a sensible woman. I don’t want them
to have a breath of it, for fear of disappointment....”
(How strangely she was looking at
him, her face so white and anxious!) He brought
it out roundly, “Yes, Mrs. Farnham, just between
us, I really believe I can cure him.”</p>

<p>She gave a low cry that was like a wail. “Oh,
Doctor!” she cried, appalled, staring at him.</p>

<p>What was the matter with the woman, now? He
stared back at her, blankly, startled, entirely at a
loss.</p>

<p>Another look came into her eyes, an imploring,
imploring look. She clasped her hands beseechingly.
“Oh, <i>Doctor</i>!” she begged him, in a quavering voice.</p>



<p>From her eyes, from her voice, from her beseeching
attitude, from her trembling hands, he took in
her meaning—took it in with a tingling shock of
surprise at first. And then with a deep recognition
of it as something he had known all along.</p>

<p>She saw the expression change in his face, saw
the blank look go out of his eyes, saw the understanding
look come in.</p>

<p>It was a long rich interchange of meanings that
took place as they sat staring hard at each other,
the gaunt, middle-aged man no longer merely a
doctor, the dull middle-aged woman, transfigured to
essential wisdom by the divination of her loving
heart. Profound and human things passed from
one to the other.</p>

<p>Mattie heard some one stirring in the house. “I
must go! I must go!” she said groaningly. She
limped down the path. Her feet were aching like
the toothache with the haste of her expeditions that
afternoon.</p>



<p>Half an hour later they had to come out and call
the doctor to supper, fairly to shout in his ear he
was so sunk in his thoughts, the evening paper lying
unread across his knees.</p>

<p>“Mercy me! Didn’t you hear the supper bell?”
cried his wife. “It’s been ringing like anything!”</p>





<h3>Chapter 20</h3>


<p>ON the evening of the day when Mrs. Knapp
was informed that she would be put in Miss
Flynn’s place Helen and her father celebrated by
making an omelette with asparagus tips (Mother’s
favorite supper dish) and Henry was sent scurrying
out to bring back a brick of mixed vanilla and
chocolate from Angelotti’s Ice-Cream Parlor. They
did not play whist that evening. They just sat
around and talked it over and admired Mother
and heard again and again about the thrice-blessed
events in the family of Miss Flynn’s niece, which led
to her retirement. “Of course it’s terribly, terribly
sad!” Mother reminded them. “Those poor little
children left without their mother! Nothing—<i>nothing</i>
can ever make up to them for such a loss.”</p>

<p>But this decent observation cast no shade over
the rejoicings. Miss Flynn was but a remote and
disagreeable legend to the children; and she had
been a particular <i>bête-noire</i> for Lester in the old
days. As for her utterly unknown niece—no,
Mother could not make that shadowy death cast
anything but sunshine into their lives. They went
on planning all the more energetically about the
things they could do if they could have a Ford and
go off to the country together for picnics on Sundays—even
Father! They talked about which college
Helen would like to attend. They talked about
which kind of bicycle Henry liked the best.</p>

<p>The children joined in the talk till nine o’clock,
and long after they were in bed with their lights
out they could hear the distant murmur of Father’s
and Mother’s voices going on planning, such a
friendly, cheerful, easy sort of murmur. Helen
could not remember when she had ever heard Father
and Mother talk together like that. It was like
music in her ears. The last thought she had before
she fell asleep was, “I am so happy! I never was
so happy!”</p>

<p>Her mother fell asleep on the same thought. Apparently
the excitement of it was too much for her,
for she woke up suddenly, to hear the clock strike
three, and found she could not get to sleep again
because at once, in a joyful confusion, her mind was
filled with a rush of happy thoughts, “I am to have
Miss Flynn’s place. Three thousand a year. And
a bonus! In a year or so I ought to be making
four thousand.”</p>

<p><i>Four thousand dollars!</i> They had never had
more than eighteen hundred. Her thoughts vibrated
happily between plans of what they could do here
at the house and plans of what she would do in
the reorganization of the department at the store.
For some time, as she lay awake, her mind was as
active and concrete and concentrated on her work
as ever in the store; she was planning a system of
post-card notices to customers when something especially
suited to one or another came in:—“Dear Mrs.
Russell: Among the new things in the department
which have just come in from New York are some
smocked, hand-made children’s dresses that look
exactly like your little Margery....” “Dear Miss
Pelman: Do you remember the suit you did not buy
because of the horizontal trimming on the skirt?
Mr. Willing found in New York last week the same
suit without that line. I am laying it aside till you
can drop in to look at it.”</p>

<p>She wondered if she could let her salesgirls send
out such cards too. No, it must be done with great
discretion—above all must not seem too urgent.
People didn’t like to feel they were being hunted
down.</p>

<p>She stepped about mentally among the innumerable
details of her plans with her usual orderly
mastery of them, her usual animated interest in
them, her usual unquestioning acceptance of them
as important. From them she went on to plans
for a series of educational talks to her salesgirls
about the fabrics and styles and fine points of their
merchandise. She wished she could do the same
thing for the girls in the Ladies’ Waist and Sweater
Department. There were some such bright girls
there, but so ignorant of their business. They’d
pick it up in no time if they had the chance, if
she were allowed to....</p>

<p>Why! With a tremor all over her, she wondered
if some time she might not be not only head of
her own department, but superintendent for all that
floor. By a flash of prescience she suddenly knew
as she lay there alone in the quiet that the road
to advancement lay open before her, that she could
step along surely and steadily to success and take
her dearly loved children with her, working for them
with all her might, profoundly thankful to be able
to give them what she had always so tragically and
impotently wished them to have.</p>

<p>The wideness of this thought, the blackness of the
night, the unwonted prone passivity of her energetic
body, all wrought upon her to a strange softness of
mood. She felt almost like a girl again ... dreaming.</p>

<p>And that made her think of Lester. He had been
in her mind more than usual of late, as she had
learned more about the lives of the other women
employed in the store. She was one of the older
employees and almost at once the younger women
had leaned on her, turned to her with confidences,
and asked her advice as the women of her church
had always done. But these were rougher, rawer
lives into which she now looked. That haggard-eyed
Mrs. Hemp, in the kitchen-ware department, what a
horrible picture she had drawn of her relations with
her husband. “He’s going with one of the girls in
the collar-factory now, Mrs. Knapp. I wouldn’t put
up with it a minute if it weren’t for the children.
That man was unfaithful to me, Mrs. Knapp, six
months after we were married, and my first baby on
the way. And it’s been a new girl for him ever
since whenever he got tired of the old one.” And
Margaret Donahue, she that read novels on the sly,
but never would look at a man, what had she said?
“They make me sick,” she declared briefly with an
expression on her young face which Mrs. Knapp
would have given a good deal not to have seen. “I’d
no more let a man come near me than a toad. I’ve
seen too much of what Papa does to Mama.”</p>

<p>And the woman who scrubbed the floors, that
evening she had come to beg Mrs. Knapp to let her
sleep at the store, under a counter, in the toilet-room,
anywhere, so she would not have to go home.
“You’re a married woman yourself, Mrs. Knapp,”
she had said. “You know what men are like. Judd
is in one of his crazy spells! I’m afraid to go home
till he gets over it. Honest I am, Mrs. Knapp. Let
me stay here! I don’t care where! I’ll sit up all
night in a chair if you’ll only let me stay.”</p>

<p>Eva had brought her home and let her sleep on
a mattress on the floor in her own room. She had
felt an immense horrified pity for her; but she had
hated her for that phrase, “You are a married
woman, Mrs. Knapp. You know what men are
like!” Did she think for a minute that Lester
Knapp was that kind of a brute! Couldn’t she see
by <i>looking</i> at him that he was a million times too
fine to ... she hated the woman again to-night as
she thought of it, and the thought brought up before
her all that Lester had been to her.</p>

<p>No woman could have better reason than she to
trust the delicacy, the warm loving-heartedness, the
self-control, the innate decency of a man. They
had been married for fourteen years, and from the
sweet, sweet early days of their young honeymoon
when, ignorant and innocent both of them, they
had stumbled their way towards each other, she
had never known a single instant of this poisonous
atmosphere of suspicion and hate and endured violence
which these other women apparently took for
granted as the inevitable relationship of husband
and wife. How good Lester had been to her! She
had not appreciated it. She had not really thought
of it. It had never occurred to her that he might
be anything else.</p>

<p>And how good to the children! Never an impatient
word, like most men. He was the best father
in the world. Not another man she knew could
have endured it to be so shut up with the children.
How faithfully he had tried to take her place, now
that she could not be in her rightful position with
them. What lovely memories the children would
have of their father, always! Was it possible he
was of the same flesh and blood as Ellen O’Hern’s
father who never, so Ellen said, passed one of his
children without aiming a blow at it.</p>

<p>The overflowing of this affection for Lester which
had been slowly rising for weeks; her deep thankfulness
for what she would be able to do for the
children ... she found herself trembling in her
bed. She felt an impulsive longing to share her
emotion with Lester, to put her arms about his
neck and let him know that she did not take his
loyalty, his gentleness, his faithfulness, his fineness,
so coldly for granted as she had seemed. She had
been so unhappy about their hideous poverty. That
was all. It was abominable to be poor! It brought
out the worst in every one. When you were distracted
with worry about money, you simply weren’t
yourself.</p>

<p>Warm and flushed, she sprang out of bed, lighted
a candle and went softly downstairs in her slippered
feet. Neither Lester nor Stephen woke as she
went into the room, and she stood for an instant
gazing down at them. Stephen was beautiful and
strong, sleeping with both rounded arms flung up
over his head. Lester was looking almost like a
boy in the abandon of his sleep, like the fine, true-hearted,
sensitive boy to whom she had given herself
as a girl.</p>

<p>But that boy had been vibrant with life from his
head to his heels. And now half of his body lay
dead. From the first it had been appalling to Evangeline
to see that helpless, frozen immobility. How
splendidly he had endured it, without a complaint!
But she had seen from his eagerness to-night, as
they talked of the possibility of having a Ford, how
imprisoned he had felt, how wild with pleasure it
made him to think he would be able to get out of
these four walls. She would never have been as
patient as he! If she had been condemned to that
death-in-life of half her body, not able even to turn
over in bed without waking up to a nightmare of
struggle, her legs like so much stone....</p>

<p>Had she made a sound? Had the light of the
candle disturbed him a little?</p>

<p>Without waking, Lester drew a long breath,
turned over easily in bed, drew up his knees with
a natural, flexible motion, threw his arm out over
the covers, and dropped off to profound sleep once
more.</p>



<p>Everybody at the store was sure, the next day,
that Mrs. Knapp was coming down with some serious
malady. She was not only extremely pale and
shaken by shivers that ran all over her. It was
worse. She had a look of death-like sickness that
frightened the girls in her department. They sent
for Mr. Willing to come.</p>

<p>When he did, he gave one look at Mrs. Knapp’s
pinched face and stooped shoulders and ordered
her home at once. “You’re coming down with the
flu, Mrs. Knapp. Everybody’s having it. Now it
doesn’t amount to anything this year if you take it
quick. But it’s foolishness to try to keep on your
feet. You get right home, take some quinine and
some aspirin, and give yourself a sweat. You’ll be
all right. But don’t wait a minute.”</p>

<p>Without a word, Mrs. Knapp put on her wraps
and went out of the store. She did not turn homeward.
She dared not go home and face Lester
and the children till she had wrestled with those
awful questions and had either answered them or
been killed by them.</p>

<p>Where could she go to be alone? She decided
that she would walk straight ahead of her out into
the country. No, that would not do. Everybody
knew her. They would comment on it. They would
ask her questions. She felt that she would burst
into shrieks if any one asked her a question just
then.</p>

<p>As she hesitated, she saw over the roofs of the
houses the spire of St. Peter’s pointing upward,
and with a rush her heart turned towards the quiet
and solitude of the church. Thank Heaven, it was
always kept open.</p>

<p>She hurried down a side-street and, pushing open
the heavy door, stumbled forward into the hushed,
dusky, empty building. She felt her way to the
nearest pew, knelt down and folded her hands as
if to pray. She tried with all her might to pray.
But could not.</p>

<p>The raging unrest and turmoil in her heart rose
up in clashing waves and filled the church with its
clamor. It was in vain that she tried to combat it
with odds and ends of prayers which came into her
mind with the contact of the pew, with the familiar
atmosphere of church.</p>

<p>“<i>Almighty and most merciful Father....</i>”</p>

<p>Lester was better!</p>

<p>“<i>Oh, God, who art the author of peace and lover
of concord, in....</i>”</p>

<p>Lester would get well ... would get well!</p>

<p>“<i>God be merciful to us and bless us and show us
the....</i>”</p>

<p>And then.... And then....</p>

<p>“No! No! No!” she cried out aloud, passionately,
and pressed her trembling hands over her mouth,
frightened.</p>

<p>She was a wicked woman. God be merciful to
me, a sinner. She had no heart. She did not want
her husband to get well. She did not want to go
home and live with her children.</p>

<p>But she must. She must! There was no other
way. Like a person shut up suddenly in an airless
prison, she ran frantically from one locked door to
another, beating her hands on them, finding them
sullenly strong, not even shaken on their cruel steel
hinges as she flung herself against them. If Lester
got well, of course he could not stay at home and
keep house and take care of the children ... no
able-bodied man ever did that. What would people
say? It was out of the question. People would
laugh at Lester. They would laugh at her. They
would not admire her any more. What would people
say if she did not go back at once to the children?
She who had always been so devoted to them, she
whom people pitied now because she was forced to be
separated from them. Every one had heard her say
how hard it was for a mother to be separated from
her....</p>

<p>For one instant, an instant she never forgot, Evangeline
knew for the first, the only time in her life, a
gust of cold, deadly contempt for herself. It nearly
killed her, she who had tried so hard all her life
to keep her self-respect, she who had been willing to
pay any price so that in her own eyes she might
be always in the right. Yes, it nearly killed her.</p>

<p>But it did not reconcile her to the inevitable nor
bow her spirit in resignation. Never before had she
been asked to pay any such price as this.</p>

<p>She couldn’t! She couldn’t! She stood stock-still
in her prison cell and wrung her hands in revolt.
She simply could not. After having known something
else, she could not go back to the narrow,
sordid round of struggle with intolerable ever-renewed
drudgery, to the daily, hourly contact with
the children’s forgetfulness, carelessness, foolishness
... to Stephen’s horrible tempers ... with no
outlet ... no future ... poverty for them all,
always.</p>

<p>Poverty! It came down suffocatingly over her
head like a smothering blanket thrown and twisted
hard by an assailant who had sprung upon her out
of the dark. She had thought herself safe from that
long, slow starvation. To go back to it, to the
raging, helpless narrowness of an income tragically
too small, to rise up and lie down with that leaden
care, to drag it about all day like a ball and chain
... she could never endure it now that she knew
that it was not in the least inevitable, knew how
easy it was to avoid it, knew that if Lester were
only willing to care a little more, to try a little
harder, to put his mind on it really and truly, to <i>give
his heart to it</i> as she did....</p>

<p>All her old burning impatience with Lester was
there, boiling up in clouds from the cauldron of her
heart.</p>

<p>Through those turbid clouds she had a glimpse
of a woman, touched and moved, standing by a
man’s bedside and blessing him silently for his faithfulness,
his gentleness, his fineness ... but those
figures were far away, flat and unreal, like something
in a made-up picture. They were but an added
irritation. She hated the thought of them as a creature
in flames would hate the recollection of a running
brook.</p>

<p>Poverty ... isolation, monotony, stagnation,
killing depression over never-ending servile tasks
... <i>poverty</i>!</p>

<p>There was no way out. She knew that now. But
she could not endure it. She never could endure it
again. She would hate Lester. She would kill herself
and the children.</p>

<p>She had sunk lower and lower till now she was
crouching in a heap, panting, her bent arms over
her face as if beaten down by relentless blows which
she could no longer even try to parry.</p>

<p>What could she do? Her native energy rose up
blindly, staggering, like a courageous fighter who
has been knocked out but does not know it. What
could she <i>do</i>? With a terrible effort, she strove to
rise to a higher level than this mere brute suffering.
She tried—yes, she really tried for a moment to
think what was the right thing to do. She tried again
to pray, to ask God to show her what was the right
thing for a good woman to do—but she could not
pray.</p>

<p>“<i>Grant, O Lord, I beseech thee ... pour into
our hearts such....</i>” No, she could not pray.
She could not command her mind to any such coherence
as prayer. Whirling snatches of the thoughts
which had filled her mind incessantly since the night
before were blown across her attention like birds
driven before a tornado—“The place for a mother
is with her children—” How many times she
had heard that—and said it. She was a bad
woman to rebel so against it. And it would do her
no good to rebel. What else could she do? Around
and around the cell she tore, beating her hands on
those locked doors. Some one had to stay and keep
house and take care of the children and make the
home. And if Lester were cured he couldn’t. No
able-bodied man could do such work, of course. Nobody
ever heard of such a thing. Men had to make
the living. What would people say? They would
laugh. They would make fun of the children. And
of Lester. And of her. They would think of course
she ought to want to do it. Every one had heard
her say how hard it was for a.... And they
couldn’t go away to another city, somewhere else,
where no one knew them. Her one chance was here,
here!</p>



<p>But all at once with a final roar the tumult swept
off and went beating its way into the distance, out
of the church and her heart. There was a dead,
blank silence about her, through which there came
to her a clear, neat, compact thought, “But perhaps
Lester will not get well. Perhaps he will not get
well.”</p>

<p>A deep bodeful hush filled her heart. It was as
though she had suddenly gone deaf to all the noises
of the world, to everything but that one possibility.
She was straighter now, no longer crouched and
panting. She was on her knees, her hands clasped,
her head decently bent, in the familiar attitude of
Sunday morning.</p>

<p>At last she was praying.</p>

<p>A moment later she was running out of the church
as though a phantom had risen beside her and laid
a skeleton hand on her shoulder ... she had not
been praying that Lester ... no, it was not <i>possible</i>
that she had been praying that her husband
would not get well!</p>

<p>But soon she walked more quietly, more at her
usual pace. After all she had nothing to go on,
nothing to be sure of, nothing really to make her
think it very likely that Lester would....</p>




<h3>Chapter 21</h3>


<p>ONE of the interests of life for Lester was the
uncertainty about who was to be his mental
companion for any given day. It seemed to be
something over which he had no control. Sometimes
he had thought it might be the weather which
settled the matter. Not infrequently his first early-morning
look at the world told him with which great
spirit he was to live that day. A clear, breezy, bird-twittering
dawn after rain meant Christina Rossetti’s
child-poems. A soft gray down-pour of warm
rain, varnishing the grass to brilliance and beating
down on the earth with a roll of muted drum-notes,
always brought Hardy to his mind. Golden sun
spilled in floods over the new green of the quivering
young leaves meant Shelley. And Browning was for
days when the sun rose rich and many-colored out
of confused masses of turbid clouds.</p>

<p>But it was not always the weather. Sometimes as
he opened his eyes, his chosen comrade for the day
was there beside him before he had taken in anything
more of the visible world than the white vacancy
of the ceiling with those familiar blemishes,
which were by this time a part of his brain. He did
not always welcome the companion of the day, especially
when the unseen spirit but repeated and intensified
the color of his own temperament, from
which he was so glad to escape by following the
trumpets and fanfare of a temperament more
brightly, more vividly alive. But he had found it
was of little use to try to alter the day’s destiny. He
could indeed, easily enough, bring to mind mechanically
many others of the blessed company of articulate
human beings who sang for him what he could
never say for himself; but he could hear, really hear
in his deep heart’s core, nothing but the appointed
voice.</p>

<p>So he resigned himself to a brooding, astringent
day when he woke up one morning and even before
he opened his eyes, heard,</p>


<p>“But ‘falling, falling, falling’ there’s your song,</p>
<p>The cradle song that sings you to the grave.”</p>


<p>That was no longer meant for him, Lester reflected,
as he struggled with the fatiguing, humiliating
problem of getting himself dressed without help.
He had spent years in falling, falling, falling,—and,
tiring of it, had fallen once for all,—fallen all anybody
could fall, so completely that there was no
more to say about it. That job was done.</p>

<p>With a straining pull on his arms, he managed to
swing and claw himself into his wheel chair, and
sat quiet for a moment to get his breath. Whoever
would think that dead human legs could be so infernally
hard to get from one place to another!
They seemed to weigh more than all the rest of his
body put together, he thought, as he lifted one with
both hands and changed it to an easier position.</p>

<p>He sat panting, losing for an instant his firmly
held self-control, succumbing to what was always
near the surface, a shamed horror of his mutilated,
strengthless body. It came upon him that day with
such poisonous violence that he was alarmed and
aroused himself to resist.</p>

<p>“The thing to remember,” he told himself sternly
and contemptuously, “is that it concerns only me,
and what concerns me is not of the slightest importance.
I’m done for, was really done for, long
ago. Nothing that can happen to me matters now.”
He heard as if it were a wistful voice saying,</p>


<p>“But neither parted roads, nor cent per cent</p>
<p>May starve quite out the child that lives in us,</p>
<p>The Child that is the Man, the Mystery.”</p>


<p>And he replied bitterly to this, “That’s all you
know about it! Cent per cent can starve it dead,
dead! It turned the trick for me, all right.”</p>

<p>“Well, no funeral orations over it anyhow,” he
told himself. “If it got starved, that’s a sign it deserved
to starve, that it didn’t have the necessary
pep to hustle around and get its food.</p>


<p>“All that can be annihilated must be annihilated</p>
<p>That the children of Jerusalem may be saved from slavery.”</p>


<p>But he knew that he did not really believe this clean,
trenchant ruthlessness, and cursed himself out for
the sniveling sentimentality which he could not kill.</p>



<p>Then Stephen turned over and opened his eyes.
Why, there was Father up and dressed already!
He scrambled hastily to his knees, “You didn’t lace
your shoes, did you?” he cried roughly and threateningly.
That was a service to Father which he had
taken for his very own. He would have killed
Henry or Helen if they had dared to do it.</p>

<p>“No, old man, I didn’t lace my shoes,” said
Father, smiling at him, “for the very good reason
that I can’t. I couldn’t get along without the services
of my valet.”</p>

<p>Stephen looked relieved, slid out of bed, sat down
on the floor and began to pull the laces up. Once
he looked up at his father and smiled. He loved to
do this for Father.</p>

<p>That evening was the second time in succession
that Evangeline went to bed directly after supper.
She said she was trying to stave off an attack of influenza
with extra sleep and doses of quinine.
Lester and the children did not play whist when
Mother was not there, neither when she was tired
and went to bed early nor when she stayed down
in the store evenings, taking stock or working over
newly arrived goods with Mr. and Mrs. Willing.
Whist was connected with Mother, and although
she often told them they need not lose the evenings
when she could not be there, and would enjoy playing
with dummy for a change, they never got out
the cards unless she was with them.</p>

<p>Father usually read aloud to them on such evenings,
and they wouldn’t have missed that for anything.
That evening he read a rhymed funny story
about a farmer who got blown away from his barn
one winter night, and, with his lantern waving, slid
two miles down the mountain before he could stop
himself. This was a great favorite of theirs and
made them laugh harder every time they heard
it.</p>


<p>“Sometimes he came with arms outspread</p>
<p>Like wings, revolving in the scene</p>
<p>Upon his longer axis and</p>
<p>With no small dignity of mien.</p>
<p>Faster or slower as he chanced,</p>
<p>Sitting or standing as he chose,</p>
<p>According as he feared to risk</p>
<p>His neck, or thought to spare his clothes.”</p>


<p>And Helen liked the end, too, that Father always
brought out with a special accent, the way the
farmer didn’t give up. As he started silently and
doggedly back the long way around, miles and miles
in the cold, she walked along beside him, sharing
something of his quiet resistance to Fate. <i>That</i> was
the way to do when you’d slid all out of the way
you wanted to go!</p>

<p>Father read another one after that about a bonfire,
which, although she did not quite understand
it all, always made Helen tremble with excitement.
Henry did not understand any of it and did not try
to. It never bothered him now when he did not
understand the poems Father read to Helen. He
just stopped listening and played with his puppy’s
ear, and lost himself in the warm, soft heaviness of
the puppy’s little sprawling body on his knees.
Sometimes he put his face lovingly down on the
little dog’s head, his heart melting with tenderness.
He needed no poetry out of a book.</p>


<p>“It will have roared first and mixed sparks with stars,</p>
<p>And sweeping round it with a flaming sword,</p>
<p>Made the dim trees stand back in wider circles.”</p>


<p>“Oh,” cried Helen, loving the sound of the words
as Henry loved his puppy, “isn’t that just scrumptious!”</p>


<p>“The breezes were so spent with winter blowing</p>
<p>They seemed to fail the bluebirds under them</p>
<p>Short of the perch their languid flight was towards;</p>
<p>And my flame made a pinnacle to heaven.”</p>


<p>“Oh, <i>Father</i>,” said Helen, wriggling on her chair
with delight, “isn’t it too lovely!” And then, in a
passion of longing, “Oh, I <i>wish</i> I could write like
that!”</p>

<p>Something in the expression of her father’s face
struck her. She was only thirteen, but an older
intuition from her coming womanhood made her say
impulsively, with all her heart, “Father, you love
it so ... why don’t <i>you</i> ... didn’t you ever try
to write poetry, too?”</p>

<p>To her confusion, a slow, deep flush mounted all
over her father’s face. He looked down at the book
in silence.</p>

<p>Helen was as horrified as if she had flung open
the door of a secret sanctuary in a temple. She
jumped up from the sofa, and not understanding
her father, nor herself, nor what she was doing, “<i>Oh,
Father, dear,</i>” she murmured, her arms around his
neck.</p>

<p>Henry and his puppy looked up at them sleepily.
“Is it bedtime?” asked Henry.</p>

<p>Helen went to sleep that night, still feeling the
great hug Father had given her. She had never felt
Father love her so much before.</p>



<p>Downstairs before he went to bed her father, turning
over the pages of a book, was reading,</p>


<p>“And nothing to look backward to with pride,</p>
<p>And nothing to look forward to with hope.”</p>


<p>“Come, come!” he said to himself. “Terence, this
is stupid stuff, you eat your victuals fast enough.
We’ll have to call this day one of our failures. I’d
better get it over with and start another.” His
heart was still bleeding to the old wound he had
thought healed and forgotten for years, which
Helen’s sudden question had torn open. Good
Heavens, weren’t you safe from those old buried
griefs until you were actually under the sod?</p>

<p>And yet mingled with the old bitterness was a new
sweetness, Helen’s sympathy, Helen’s understanding.
It had never occurred to him before that children
could give something as well as take all—the all
he was so thankful to give them. Why, he thought
wistfully, Helen might be the companion he had
never had. He shook his head. No, that would not
be fair to her. No dead-hand business! She must
find her companions in her own generation. He
must be ready to stand aside and let her pass on
when the time came. That new sweetness was offered
to him only that he might learn to make another
renunciation.</p>

<p>He looked about him to see if there was anything
to be done for the house before he went to bed.
“Shall I close that window over there?” he thought
to himself. “No, the night is warm. It will give
us more air.”</p>

<p>He wheeled himself to the closed door of the dining-room,
opened it and perceived that the wind was
blowing hard from the other direction, for a strong
draught instantly sucked past him between the open
window back of him and the open window at the
head of Stephen’s bed. He felt the gust and saw
the long, light curtain curl eddying out towards him
over the flicker of Stephen’s bedside candle.</p>

<p>It caught in an instant. It flared up like gun-cotton,
all over its surface. It came dropping down
... horribly dropping down towards Stephen’s unconscious,
upturned face ... flames on that tender
flesh!</p>



<p>Stephen’s father found himself standing by the
bed, snatching the curtain to one side, crushing out
the flames between his hands. His wheel chair still
stood by the open door.</p>

<p>The draught between the two open windows now
blew out the candle abruptly. In the darkness the
door slammed shut with a loud report.</p>



<p>But the room was not dark to Lester. As actually
as he had seen and felt the burst of flame from the
curtain, he now felt himself flare up in physical
ecstasy to be standing on his own feet, to know that
he had taken a dozen steps, to know that he was no
longer a half-man, a mutilated wreck from whom
normal people averted their eyes in what they called
pity but what was really contempt and disgust.</p>

<p>He was like a man who has been shut in a cage
too low for him to stand, who has crouched and
stooped and bowed his shoulders, and who suddenly
is set free to rise to his full stature, to throw his
arms up over his head. The relief from oppression
was as rending as a pain. It was a thousand times
more joyful than any joy he had ever known. His
self, his ego, savagely, grimly, harshly beaten down
as it had been, sprang up with an exultant yell.</p>

<p>The flame of its exultation flared up like gun-cotton,
as the curtain had flared.</p>

<p>And died down as quickly, crushed and ground to
blackness between giant hands that snatched it to
one side as it dropped down towards Stephen’s unconscious
upturned face ... flames on that tender
flesh....</p>

<p>Lester knew nothing but that there was blackness
within and without him. He was lying fully dressed
across the foot of his bed. His face was buried in
the bedclothes, but it was no blacker there than in
the room ... in his heart.</p>

<p>What made it so black? He did not know. He
was beyond thought. He was nothing but wild,
quivering apprehension, as he had been in the instant
when, poised on the icy roof, he had turned to hurl
himself down into the void. The terror of that instant
was with him again. What fall was before him
now?</p>

<p>He went a little insane as he lay there on the
bed. He seemed to himself to be falling, as he had
fallen so many times during his convalescence, endlessly,
endlessly, in a dread that grew worse because
now he knew what unutterable anguish awaited
him. He shuddered, grasped the blanket and tore
at it savagely, wondering madly what it was ...
what it was ... what it was....</p>

<p>He came to himself with a great start that shook
him, that shook the bed so that it rattled in the
dark silent room.</p>

<p>He sat up and wiped his face that was dripping
wet.</p>

<p>Now what? His mind was lucid. He was not
falling, he was on his bed, in his room, with Stephen
sleeping beside him in the darkness. And he knew
now that he could get well.</p>

<p>Well, what was he to do, now that he knew he
could get well?</p>



<p>He knew beforehand that there was nothing he
could do. Life had once more cast him out from
the organization of things.</p>

<p>Could he do any better than before his miserable,
poorly done, detested work? Could he hate it any
less? No, he would hate it a thousand times more
now that he knew that it was not only a collaboration
with materialism fatly triumphant, but that it kept
him from his real work, vital, living, creative work,
work he could do as no one else could, work that
meant the salvation of his own children. Could he
sit again sunk in that treacherous bog of slavery to
possessions, doing his share of beckoning unsuspecting
women into it ... and all the time know that
perhaps at that very minute Helen was repressing
timidly some sweet shy impulse that would fester
in her heart when it might have blossomed into fragrance
in the sun? It would drive him mad to see
again in Helen’s eyes that old stupid, crushed expression
of self-distrustful discouragement which he
had always thought was the natural expression of
her nature.</p>

<p>He thought of Henry, leaping and running with
his dog, both of them casting off sparkling rays of
youth as they capered. He thought of Henry
ghastly white, shrunken, emptied of vitality, as he
lay on the bed that last evening of the old life, in
the condition which they had all thought was the
inevitable one for Henry.</p>

<p>And Eva.... He gave a deep groan as he
thought of Eva—Eva who loved the work he hated,
who took it all simple-heartedly at the solemnly
preposterous value that the world put on it—to shut
that strong-flying falcon into the barnyard again, to
watch her rage, and droop, and tear at her own
heart and at the children’s!</p>



<p>Solemnly, out of the darkness, as though it had
been Stephen’s voice reciting “The Little Boy Lost”
to him, he heard,</p>


<p>“Father, father, where are you going?</p>
<p>Oh, do not walk so fast.</p>
<p>Speak, father, speak to your little boy</p>
<p>Or else I shall be lost.”</p>


<p>And there was Stephen....</p>

<p>Lester had no words for what the name meant to
him now—nothing but a great aching sorrow into
which he sank helplessly, letting its black waves
close over his head.</p>

<p>Presently he struggled up to the air again and
looked about him. There must be some way of
escape. Anybody but a weakling would invent some
way to save them all. He must leave nothing unthought
of, he must start methodically to make the
rounds of the possibilities. He must not lose his
head in this hysterical way. He must be a man and
master circumstances.</p>



<p>Would it be possible for both of them to work,
he and Eva? Other parents did sometimes. The
idea was that with the extra money you made you
hired somebody to take care of the children. If
before his accident any one had dreamed of Eva’s
natural gift for business, he would have thought the
plan an excellent one. But it was only since his
accident that he had had the faintest conception of
what “caring for the children” might mean. Now,
now that he had lived with the children, now that
he had seen how it took all of his attention to make
even a beginning of understanding them, how it took
all of his intelligence and love to try to give them
what they needed, spiritually and mentally ... no!</p>

<p>You could perhaps, if you were very lucky—though
it was unlikely in the extreme—it was conceivable
that by paying a high cash price you might
be able to hire a little intelligence, enough intelligence
to give them good material care. But you
could never hire intelligence sharpened by love. In
other words you could not hire a parent. And children
without parents were orphans.</p>

<p>Whom could they hire? What kind of a person
would it be? He tried to think concretely of the
possibilities. Why—he gave a sick, horrified laugh—why,
very likely some nice old grandmotherly
soul like Mrs. Anderson who, so everybody would
say, would be just the right person, because she had
had so much experience with children. He clenched
his hands in a murderous animal-fury at the thought
of Stephen’s proud, strong, vital spirit left helpless
to the vicious, vindictive meanness of a Mrs.
Anderson. And from the outside, coming in late in
the afternoon with no first-hand information about
what happened during the day, how could he and
Eva ever know a Mrs. Anderson from any one else?</p>

<p>Well, perhaps not a Mrs. Anderson. Let him
think of the very best that might conceivably be
possible. Perhaps a good-natured, young houseworker
who would be kind to the children, indulgent,
gentle. He thought of the long hours during which
he bent his utmost attention on the children to understand
them, to see what kind of children they
were, to think what they needed most now—not
little passing pleasures such as good nature and indulgence
would suggest, but real food for what was
deepest in them. He thought of how he used his
close hourly contact with them as a means of looking
into their minds and hearts; how he used the
work-in-common with them as a scientist conducts
an experiment station to accumulate data as material
for his intelligence to arrange in order, so that his
decisions might be just and far-sighted as well as
loving. He thought how in the blessed mental leisure
which comes with small mechanical tasks he pored
over this data, considered it and reconsidered in
the light of some newer evidence—where was now a
good-natured young hired girl, let her be ever so indulgent
and gentle? “You can’t <i>hire</i> somebody to
be a parent for your children!” he thought again,
passionately. They are born into the world asking
you for bread. If you give them a stone, it were
better for you that that stone were hanged about
your neck and cast into the sea.</p>

<p>Eva had no bread to give them—he saw that in
this Day-of-Judgment hour, and no longer pretended
that he did not. Eva had passionate love and devotion
to give them, but neither patience nor understanding.
There was no sacrifice in the world which
she would not joyfully make for her children except
to live with them. They had tried that for fourteen
dreadful years and knew what it brought them.
That complacent unquestioned generalization, “The
mother is the natural home-maker”; what a juggernaut
it had been in their case! How poor Eva,
drugged by the cries of its devotees, had cast herself
down under its grinding wheels—and had dragged
the children in under with her. It wasn’t because
Eva had not tried her best. She had nearly killed
herself trying. But she had been like a gifted
mathematician set to paint a picture.</p>

<p>And he did have bread for them. He did not pretend
he had not. He had found that he was in
possession of miraculous loaves which grew larger
as he dealt them out. For the first time since his
untried youth Lester knew a moment of pride in
himself, of satisfaction with something he had done.
He thought of Henry, normal, sound, growing as a
vigorous young sapling grows. He thought of Helen
opening into perfumed blossom like a young fruit
tree promising a rich harvest; of Stephen, growing
as a strong man grows, purposeful, energetic, rejoicing
in his strength, and loving, yes, loving. How
good Stephen was to him! That melting upward
look of protecting devotion when he had laced up
his shoes that morning!</p>


<p>“Father, father, where are you going?</p>
<p>Oh, do not walk so fast!”</p>


<p>Well, there was the simple, obvious possibility,
the natural, right human thing to do ... he could
continue to stay at home and make the home, since
a home-maker was needed.</p>

<p>He knew this was impossible. The instant he
tried to consider it, he knew it was as impossible as
to roll away a mountain from his path with his bare
hands. He knew that from the beginning of time
everything had been arranged to make that impossible.
Every unit in the whole of society would join
in making it impossible, from the Ladies’ Guild to
the children in the public schools. It would be
easier for him to commit murder or rob a bank than
to give his intelligence where it was most needed,
in his own home with his children.</p>

<p>“What is your husband’s business, Mrs. Knapp?”</p>

<p>“He hasn’t any. He stays at home and keeps
house.”</p>

<p>“Oh....”</p>

<p>He heard that “Oh!” reverberating infernally
down every road he tried.</p>

<p>“My Papa is an insurance agent. What does
your Papa do for a living, Helen?”</p>

<p>“He doesn’t do anything. Mother makes the living.
Father stays home with us children.”</p>

<p>“Oh, is he sick?”</p>

<p>“No, he’s not sick.”</p>

<p>“Oh....”</p>

<p>He saw Helen, sensitive, defenseless Helen cringing
before that gigantic “oh.” He knew that soon
Henry with his normal reactions would learn to see
that “oh” coming, to hide from it, to avoid his playmates
because of it. There was no sense to that
“oh”; there had been no sense for generations and
generations. It was an exclamation that dated from
the cave-age, but it still had power to warp the
children’s lives as much as—yes, almost as much as
leaving them to a Mrs. Anderson. They would be
ashamed of him. He would lose his influence over
them. He would be of no use to them.</p>

<p>Over his head Tradition swung a bludgeon he
knew he could not parry. He had always guessed
at the presence of that Tradition ruling the world,
guessed that it hated him, guessed at its real name.
He saw it plain now, grinning sardonically high
above all the little chattering pretenses of idealism.
He knew now what it decreed: that men are in the
world to get possessions, to create material things,
to sell them, to buy them, to transport them, above
all to stimulate to fever-heat the desire for them in
all human beings. It decreed that men are of worth
in so far as they achieve that sort of material success,
and worthless if they do not.</p>

<p>That was the real meaning of the unctuous talk
of “service” in the commercial text-books which Eva
read so whole-heartedly. They were intended to fix
the human attention altogether on the importance of
material things; to make women feel that the difference
between linen and cotton is of more importance
to them than the fine, difficultly drawn,
always-varying line between warm human love and
lust; to make men feel that more possessions would
enlarge their lives ... blasphemy! Blasphemy!</p>

<p>He read as little as possible of the trade-journals
which Eva left lying around the house, but the
other day in kindling a fire with one his eye had
been caught by a passage the phrases of which had
fixed themselves in that sensitive verbal memory of
his and were not to be dislodged:—“Morally,
esthetically, emotionally <i>and</i> commercially, America
is helped, uplifted, advanced by the efforts of you
and me to induce individual Americans first to want
and then to acquire more of the finer things of life.
Take fine jewelry. It makes the purchaser a better
person by its appeal to the emotional and esthetic
side of his or her nature.... Desire for the rich
and tasteful adornments obtainable at the jewelry
store expresses itself in stronger attempts to acquire
the means to purchase. This means advancement
for America! Should you not, bearing this wonderful
thought in mind, be enthused to broaden your
contact with the buying public by increasing your
distributing....” They wrote that sort of thing
by the yard, by the mile! And they were right.
That was the real business of life, of course. He
had always known it. That was why men who did
other things, teachers, or poets, or musicians, or
ministers, were so heartily despised by normal
people. And as for any man who might try to be
a parent....</p>

<p>Why, the fanatic feminists were right, after all.
Under its greasy camouflage of chivalry, society is
really based on a contempt for women’s work in
the home. The only women who were paid, either
in human respect or in money, were women who
gave up their traditional job of creating harmony out
of human relationships and did something really useful,
bought or sold or created material objects. As
for any <i>man’s</i> giving his personality to the woman’s
work of trying to draw out of children the best there
might be in them ... fiddling foolishness! Leave
it to the squaws! He was sure that he was the only
man who had ever conceived even the possibility of
such a lapse from virile self-respect as to do what
all women are supposed to do. He knew well enough
that other men would feel for such a conception on
his part a stupefaction only equaled by their red-blooded
scorn.</p>

<p>At this he caught a passing glimpse far below the
surface. He knew that it was not only scorn he
would arouse, but suspicion and alarm. For an instant
he understood why Tradition was so intolerant
of the slightest infraction of the respect due to it,
why it was ready to tear him and all his into a
thousand pieces rather than permit even one variation
from its standard. It was because the variation
he had conceived ran counter to the prestige of
sacred possessions. Not only was it beneath the
dignity of any able-bodied brave to try to show
young human beings how to create rich, deep, happy
lives without great material possessions, but it was
subversive of the whole-hearted worship due to possessions.
It was heresy. It must be stopped at all
costs. Lester heard the threatening snarl of that
unsuspected, unquestioned Tradition, amazed that
any one dared so much as to conceive of an attack
on it. And he knew that he was not man enough to
stand up and resist the bludgeon and the snarl.</p>



<p>He had thought he had experienced all the possible
ways in which a man can feel contempt for
himself. But there was another depth before him.
For—he might as well have the poor merit of being
honest about it, and not hide behind Eva and
the children—he knew that he could stand that
“oh ...” as little as they, that he would turn
feebly sour and bitter under it, as he had before,
and blame other people for what was his own lack
of endurance.</p>

<p>Let him try to imagine it for an instant—a definite
instance. If he were once more an able-bodied man
what would he feel to have Harvey Bronson drop
in and find him making a bed while Eva sold
goods?</p>

<p>Good God! Was he such a miserable cur as to
let the thought of Harvey Bronson’s sneer stand
between him and doing what he knew was best for
the children? There they stood, infinitely precious,
hungering and thirsting for what he had to give
them ... defenseless but for him. Would he stand
back and let the opinion of the Ladies’ Guild....</p>

<p>Yes, he would.</p>

<p>That was the kind of miserable cur he was. And
now he knew it. He wiped the sweat from his face
and ground his teeth together to keep them from
chattering.</p>



<p>They were chattering like those of a man cast
adrift in a boat with only a broken paddle between
him and the roaring leap of a cataract. The roaring
was louder and louder in his ears as he felt
himself helplessly drifting towards the drop. He
had not been willing to look at it, had kept his eyes
on the shores which he had tried so vainly to reach,
struggling pitifully with his poor broken tool.</p>

<p>Now he gave up and, cowering in a heap, waited
dumbly for the crashing downfall—he who had
fallen so low, was he to fall again, lower still? He
who had thought he had kept nothing at all for himself
in life, must he give up now his one living treasure,
his self-respect? Could it be that he was thinking—he,
Lester Knapp!—of shamming a sickness he
did not have, of trampling his honor deep into the
filth of small, daily lies?</p>

<p>The thought carried him with a rush over the
wicked gleaming curve at the edge of the abyss ...
he was falling ... falling....</p>

<p>There was nothing but a formless horror of yelling
whirlpools, which sucked him down....</p>



<p>Presently it was dawn. A faint gray showed
at the windows. The blemishes on the ceiling came
into view and stalked grimly to their accustomed
stand in his brain. The night was over. Stephen
lay sleeping peacefully, the harmless, blackened bits
of the burned curtain scattered about his bed.</p>


<p>“Father, father, where are you going?</p>
<p>Oh, do not walk so fast.</p>
<p>Speak, father, speak to....”</p>


<p>It was not fast he would be walking. Or at all.</p>



<p>A robin chirped sleepily in the maple. It would
soon be day. Lester got up, shuffled over to his
wheel chair and sat down in it.</p>



<p>After a time he stooped down and unlaced his
shoes. Then he wheeled himself over beside
Stephen’s bed and waited for the day to come.</p>




<h3>Chapter 22</h3>



<p>DR. MERRITT had telephoned Mrs. Knapp
that he was going to make some very special
tests of her husband’s condition that afternoon, tests
which might be conclusive as to the possibility of
recovery. He had chosen Sunday, he told her, because
he wished her to be at home. He tried to
make his voice sound weighty and warning, and he
knew that he had succeeded when, on arriving at
the house, he found Mrs. Farnham there, with a
very sober face, twisting her handkerchief nervously
in her hands.</p>

<p>The two women looked at him in silent anxiety as
he came in. He asked with an impenetrable professional
manner to have his patient’s chair rolled
into the next room. “It is always better to make
those nerve-reflex tests in perfect quiet,” he explained.</p>

<p>Mr. Knapp with no comment rolled his chair back
into the dining-room, and the doctor closed the door.</p>



<p>In a few moments, Helen, very pale, with frightened
eyes, came in to join the waiting women. She
found them as pale as she, motionless in their chairs,
her mother’s lips trembling. She sat down on a
stool beside Aunt Mattie, who patted her shoulder
and said something in a tremulous whisper which
Helen did not catch. From the other room, from
behind the closed door, came a low murmur of voices
broken by long pauses. There was no other sound
except Stephen’s shout as he played with Henry’s
dog in the back yard.</p>

<p>More voices from behind the closed door, very
low, very restrained, a mere breath which Helen
could catch only by straining her ears. She could
not even be sure whether it were the doctor or Father
who was talking. Another long silence. Helen’s
heart pounded and pounded. She wished she could
hide her face in Aunt Mattie’s lap, but she could
not move—not till she knew.</p>

<p>Had she heard the voices again? Yes. No.
There was no sound from the next room.</p>

<p>Then, as though the doctor had been standing
there all the time, his hand on the knob, the door
suddenly opened.</p>



<p>Now that the time had come the doctor found it
hard to get the words out. He could not think of
any way to begin. The three waiting women looked
at him, imploring him silently to end their suspense.</p>

<p>He cleared his throat, sat down, looked in his case
for something which he did not find and shut the
case with a click. As if this had been a signal, he
then said hastily, in an expressionless voice, “Mrs.
Knapp, I might as well be frank with you. I do
not think it best to go on with the treatment I have
been trying for your husband. I am convinced from
the result of the tests to-day....”</p>

<p>His fingers played nervously with his watch chain.
“I am convinced, I say, that ... that it would be
very unwise to continue making an attempt to cure
this local trouble. The nervous system of the human
body, you understand, is so closely interrelated that
when you touch one part you never know what....
The thing which we doctors must take into consideration
is the total reaction on the patient. That is
the weak point with so many specialists. They consider
only the immediate seat of the trouble and
not the sum-total of the effect on the patient. You
often hear them say of an operation that killed the
patient that it was a ‘success.’ And in the case of
spinal trouble like Mr. Knapp’s, of course the
entire nervous system is.... What I have said
applies of course very especially when it is a case
of....”</p>

<p>He saw from the strained, drawn expression on
Mrs. Farnham’s face that she did not understand a
word he was saying, and brought out with desperate
bluntness, “The fact is that it would be a waste of
time for me to continue my weekly visits. I now
realize that it would be very dangerous for Mr.
Knapp ever to try to use his legs. Crutches perhaps,
later. But he must never be allowed to make
the attempt to go without crutches. It might
be....” He drew a long breath and said it. “It
might be fatal.”</p>

<p>When he finished he looked very grim and disagreeable,
and, opening his case once more, began to
fumble among the little bottles in it. God! Why
did any honest man ever take up the practice of
medicine?</p>



<p>Back of him, through the open door, Lester Knapp
could be seen in his wheel chair, his head fallen
back on the head-rest, his long face white, a resolute
expression of suffering in his eyes.</p>



<p>Mrs. Farnham began to cry softly into her handkerchief,
her shoulders shaking, the sound of her
muffled sobs loud in the hushed room.</p>

<p>Mrs. Knapp had turned very white at the doctor’s
first words and was silent a long time when he finished.
Then she said rather faintly but with her
usual firmness, “It is very hard of course for a....”
She caught herself and began again, “It is very hard,
of course, but we must all do the best we can.”</p>

<p>Helen tiptoed softly into the kitchen and out on
the back porch, closing the kitchen door behind
her carefully. Then she took one jump from the
porch to the walk and ran furiously out to the
chicken-yard where Henry and Stephen were feeding
the chickens.</p>

<p>At least Stephen was feeding the chickens. Henry
was looking anxiously towards the house, and the
moment he saw Helen come out, started back on a
run to meet her. As he ran his shadowed face
caught light from hers.</p>

<p>“It’s all right!” she told him in a loud whisper
as they came together. “The doctor says that
Father never can be cured, that he’ll always have
to go on crutches.”</p>

<p>“Oh, <i>Helen</i>!” said Henry, catching desperately
at her arm. “Are you sure? Are you sure?”</p>

<p>His mouth began to work nervously, and he
crooked his arm over his face to hide it.</p>

<p>“What’s the matter of you?” asked Stephen, running
up alarmed. Helen got down on her knees
and put her arm around the little boy. Her voice
was trembling as she said, “Stevie, dear, Father’s
going to stay right with us. He’s never going to
go away.”</p>

<p>Stephen looked at her appalled. His rosy face
paled to white. “Was he going to go <i>away</i> from
us?” he asked, horrified.</p>

<p>“Why, of course, he’d have to, to work, if the
doctor could cure him. But the doctor says he can’t.
He says Father never will....”</p>

<p>Stephen had been glaring into her face to make
sure he understood. He now pushed her from him
roughly and ran at top speed towards the house.</p>

<p>He bounded up on the porch, he burst open the
door, the house was filled with the clamor of his
passionate, questing call of “Father! <i>Fa-a-ather!</i>”</p>