<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Anderson never forgot a detail of what happened that afternoon, and she soon became letter-perfect in her often-repeated statement of the essential facts. She told and retold her story word for word like a recitation learned by heart, without alteration; except as she allowed herself from time to time to stress a little more heavily her own importance as the only witness who had seen everything, to insist yet more vehemently on her absolute freedom from responsibility for the catastrophe.</p>
			<p>“It was icy that afternoon, you know how it had thawed in the morning and then turned cold, and I was real nervous about slipping. I’m not so steady on my feet as I was fifty years ago and when I saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp putting on her things to leave the Guild meeting I said to her, ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp,’ I said, ‘won’t you let me go along with you and take your arm over the icy places? I’m real nervous about slipping,’ I said. And she said, ‘Yes, of course,’ and we started out and I felt so relieved to have her to hold to. She’s the kind you couldn’t imagine slipping, you know, the kind you’d <em>want</em> to take her arm over hard places. She’s a wonderful woman, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp is. I always said so even before all this happened. There’s nothing she can’t do. You ought to see the parlor furniture she recovered with her own hands, as good as any upholsterer you ever saw. And then didn’t her Henry pester her to let him have a dog, and a <em>white</em> dog at that! Of course she didn’t let him⁠—you know how a white dog’s hairs will show. When I was a girl I remember my Aunt Esther had a white dog⁠—but I was telling you about how we first saw the fire. We had just turned the corner by Wertheimer’s and I was looking down to pick my way, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp said, ‘Good gracious, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Anderson, what’s that on your roof?’ I looked quick but I couldn’t see anything, and she said, ‘It looks like a⁠—oh, yes, I see, a flame right by your chimney.’</p>
			<p>“And then I knew it must be so, for that end chimney of mine had had a crack in it for ever so long, and I’d tried and <em>tried</em> to get a mason to come, but you know how they hate a little tinkering repair job, and anyhow for a <em>woman</em>! Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp she started on a run for her house to telephone the fire department and I scuffled along as fast as I could for fear of slipping. I wasn’t anywhere near my front walk yet when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Knapp came running out from their house, bareheaded in all that cold with a pail in each hand. He could see me coming along slow and he hollered to me, ‘Where’s your long ladder, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Anderson?’ And I hollered back, ‘It’s hung up under the eaves of the barn, but don’t you go trying to climb up that steep icy roof, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Knapp! You’ll break your neck if you do!’ I said to him just as I’m saying to you. I did my <em>best</em> to keep him from it! I feel bad enough without that. And I give you my word I hollered to him just as I told you, ‘Don’t you go trying to climb up that steep icy roof, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Knapp. You’ll break your neck if you do!’ I said.</p>
			<p>“He didn’t say anything back so I don’t know whether he heard me or not, though I hollered at the top of my voice, I promise you. He ran around through my back yard and I after him, only I had to go slow on account of the ice, and before I turned the corner of the house, I heard somebody yelling my name back of me, ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Anderson! Come and let us in quick! Your house is on fire!’ It was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Emmet and his two boys from across the street. They had axes and they wanted me to let them in and up attic because they thought they could get at it from the inside. It seems they had a fire once in their chimney that they⁠—well, while I was trying to get my latch-key in the keyhole⁠—you can just better believe that by that time I was so mixed up I didn’t know which end my head was on, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Emmet had to take the key away and open the door himself⁠—that was after the fire engine drove up and you know what a terrible clatter they always make, and I was wild about their getting out their big hose because my sitting room ceiling had just been replastered and I was afraid the water would run down and spoil it, and by that time anyhow I had something else to worry about, for all creation was there, the way they do, you know, run wherever the fire engine goes, more men and boys than you ever <em>saw</em>! Awful tough-looking too, lots of them, from those low-down tenement houses near the tracks.⁠ ⁠… My, wasn’t I glad to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp coming back! She’s a master hand for managing things. She shooed all those hoodlums out double-quick. They were crowding right in after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Emmet, bold as brass. I tell you there don’t anybody stay long when <em>she</em> tells ’em to go. And then she headed off the firemen from turning on their hose till some of them had gone up attic to see how the Emmets were getting along, and some others had gone around back to see what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Knapp was up to. She ran upstairs with them to the attic, and I went out on the porch and leaned around to see if I could make out what they were doing back of the house⁠—and then⁠—oh, then⁠—I’ll never forget it to my dying day! I saw a couple of firemen come around from the back of the house carrying something. I couldn’t see what it was, it was so dark, but the way they carried it, the way they stepped⁠—when you’re as old as I am, and have seen as many dead people⁠ ⁠… you <em>know</em>!</p>
			<p>“I screamed out at them, ‘Oh, oh, oh, what is it? What has happened?’ But I knew before they said a word. One of them said, ‘It’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Knapp. Don’t let <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knapp know till we can get the body over to the house!’ And the other one said, ‘He must have fallen off the roof and broken his back.’ ”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
